Submitted to manuscript No.
(will be inserted by the editor)
Probabilistic Inverse Modeling of Contaminant Transport via a
Conditioned-on-Design Bayesian Physics Informed Neural Network
Milad Panahi · Giovanni Michele Porta * · Monica
Riva · Alberto Guadagnini
Received: date / Accepted: date
Abstract We address the inverse problem of reactive transport in heterogeneous porous media, where un-
known model parameters must be inferred from sparse experimental observations. The problem is complicated
by strong nonlinearities, spatial heterogeneity, and limited data availability. We propose a Conditioned-on-
Design Bayesian Physics-Informed Neural Network (CoDe-BPINN), which combines a domain-decomposed
PINN solver with a Bayesian inference network that learns the conditional distribution of model parameters
given experimental design variables. The framework is trained by maximizing a physics-informed Evidence
Lower Bound (ELBO), enabling simultaneous reconstruction of spatiotemporal concentration fields, proba-
bilistic parameter estimation, and uncertainty quantification. We demonstrate the approach using laboratory
experiments on contaminant transport through a multilayer porous column with an iodinated contrast medium.
The model accurately reproduces breakthrough dynamics while revealing systematic parameter dependence
on flow conditions. In particular, it identifies a nonlinear decrease in effective sorption capacity with increasing
flow rate and porosity, consistent with kinetic limitations and reduced adsorbent mass. The Bayesian formula-
tion also uncovers a strong negative correlation between sorption affinity and sorption capacity, quantifying the
intrinsic non-identifiability of the inverse problem. CoDe-BPINN provides a robust framework for parameter
inference and uncertainty quantification in data-scarce reactive transport problems.
Article Highlights
✦CoDe-BPINN unifies Bayesian PINNs with conditional multivariate parameter inference.
✦Bayesian inference quantifies parameter non-identifiability through posterior correlations.
✦The model learns design-dependent parameter relationships from sparse noisy observations.
Keywords Scientific Machine Learning · Reactive transport · Physics-Informed Neural Networks ·
Differentiable Physics · Inverse Modeling · Uncertainty Quantification
1 Introduction
Management of water resources is increasingly challenged by proliferation of contaminants of emerging concern
(CECs) in the global water cycle. Consequently, development of advanced remediation technologies, such
as adsorption onto engineered porous media (e.g., organo-clays), is becoming a priority in environmental
engineering scenarios [Patel, 2022]. Modeling bottlenecks resulting in a broadly documented inability to provide
accurate and unambiguous quantification of reactive transport dynamics under transient flow conditions still
undermines effective transition from material synthesis to process-scale implementation. Some of the key
challenges in this context are related to our non-exhaustive knowledge of the porous media across which
they take place and the non-linear and scale-dependent nature of physicochemical parameters governing their
evolution therein.
A common approach to describe the fate of contaminants in porous media relies on the Advection-
Dispersion-Reaction (ADR) partial differential equations (PDEs) [Rubin, 2003]. While the mathematical struc-
ture of these conservation laws is well-known, the constitutive parameters embedded therein (most notably the
M. Panahi (0000-0002-8776-5297) · G. M. Porta* (0000-0002-0636-373X) · A. Guadagnini (0000-0003-3959-9690) · M. Riva
(0000-0002-7304-4114)
Dipartimento di Ingegneria Civile e Ambientale, Politecnico di Milano, Piazza L. da Vinci 32, 20133 Milano, Italy
* To whom correspondence should be addressed: E-mail: giovanni.porta@polimi.it
arXiv:2608.17591v1  [physics.comp-ph]  18 Aug 2026


2
Milad Panahi et al.
dispersion tensor and reaction equilibr kinetic coefficients) are often unknown, spatially heterogeneous, and
scale-dependent [Bear, 1988]. Traditional workflows for model parameter estimation typically rely on batch
equilibrium experiments to determine sorption isotherms (e.g., Langmuir or Freundlich) [Foo and Hameed,
2010]. However, it is well-documented that parameters derived from static batch tests are often not represen-
tative of dynamic behaviors observed in laboratory column experiments, mainly due to hydrodynamic effects
inherent to flow systems [Limousin et al., 2007, Worch, 2008]. Hence, model calibration is more appropriately
grounded on data such as, e.g., dynamic breakthrough curves (BTCs) obtained from column experiments.
This inverse problem, namely the inference of spatially distributed or state-dependent parameters from
sparse (and noisy) observations of system states across the domain and/or at its boundaries, is notoriously ill-
posed [Tarantola, 2005]. Classical gradient-based approaches, such as the Levenberg-Marquardt algorithm or
adjoint-based methods, are deterministic optimization techniques designed to efficiently minimize a prescribed
objective function. While computationally effective, they do not resolve the intrinsic ill-posedness of the inverse
problem and often converge to a single (possibly local) solution among many plausible alternatives. As a
result, they frequently suffer from non-uniqueness (equifinality), whereby multiple parameter sets produce
indistinguishable model responses [Beven and Freer, 2001, Carrera et al., 2005]. Furthermore, while these
methods can provide approximate parameter confidence intervals through local linearization (e.g., via error
covariance matrices), they often fail to fully characterize their full (posterior) probability distribution or to
capture structural (epistemic) uncertainty in strongly non-linear systems. These elements are notably relevant
in the context of flow and contaminant transport, as the quantification of uncertainty is as critical as predictive
capability itself in defining the reliability of modeling approaches [Gupta et al., 2006, Dell’Oca et al., 2019,
Tartakovsky, 2013, Scheidt et al., 2018]. More specifically, experimental observations or reactive transport
processes typically embed information at selected space-time locations (e.g., through breakthrough curves),
which restricts the information available for parameter estimation Taylor et al. [2026], Ceriotti et al. [2019].
In recent years, Scientific Machine Learning (SciML) has emerged as a transformative paradigm to bridge
the gap between observational data and formulation of physical laws [Lavin et al., 2022]. Physics-Informed
Neural Networks (PINNs) constitute a technique of emerging interest [Raissi et al., 2019, 2024, Luo et al.,
2025], which allows embedding the residuals of the PDE governing the system dynamics directly into the
neural network loss function. PINNs serve as universal function approximators [Lagaris et al., 1998] that are
constrained by given mathematical formulations of physical laws and are designed to to learn solutions (i.e.,
system state variables of interest) from sparse data. PINNs provide a novel approach to numerical approxi-
mation that allows circumventing some limitations of classical methods such as, e.g., mesh-dependency. While
standard PINNs have demonstrated remarkable success in solving inverse problems for parameter identification
[Kovachki et al., 2021, Lu et al., 2021, Li et al., 2021, Chen et al., 2020], they typically provide deterministic
point values valid only for a specific training scenario [Raissi, 2023]. Hence, they do not naturally provide
confidence intervals for the estimated parameters, nor quantify predictive uncertainty associated with the re-
constructed solution. To address these elements, Bayesian Physics-Informed Neural Networks (BPINNs) have
been proposed [Yang et al., 2021, Meng et al., 2021, Sun and Wang, 2020]. By placing probability distri-
butions over network weights and treating physical model parameters as random variables, BPINNs enable
one to distinguish between uncertainty in the neural approximation (approximation uncertainty) and in the
identification of model parameters (parameter uncertainty) [Psaros et al., 2023, Lee and Chen, 2008, Maina
and Guadagnini, 2018].
Despite these advancements, significant challenges still remain to the application of BPINNs to multi-
physics problems in heterogeneous media. Standard global neural networks often suffer from spectral bias
[Rahaman et al., 2019, Wang et al., 2022] and optimization pathologies [Fletcher, 2000] when the solution
contains sharp gradients, such as those found at material interfaces in multi-layered adsorption columns [Wang
et al., 2021]. Domain decomposition methods, such as the Conservative PINN (CPINN) [Jagtap et al., 2020a],
have then been proposed to mitigate this limitation by employing separate sub-networks for diverse physical
subdomains. Yet, their integration into a fully Bayesian inverse modeling framework remains underexplored.
This study constitutes an additional step of a comprehensive research framework designed to address para-
metric uncertainty in flow and reactive transport modeling in porous media leveraging a PINN framework. In a
first study [Panahi et al., 2025], we developed PINNs specifically tailored to Uncertainty Quantification (here-
after termed PINN-UU) to address forward propagation of parametric uncertainty. Consistent with broader
developments in the field [e.g., Flores et al., 2025, Sun et al., 2020, Zhu et al., 2019, Chen et al., 2021, Asher
et al., 2015] we demonstrated that neural networks can serve as efficient surrogates for mapping stochastic
inputs to system. In a subsequent phase, we tackled the challenge of spatial heterogeneity upon developing
differentiable solvers [Panahi et al., 2026] that rely on automatic differentiation techniques [Thuerey et al.,
2025, de Avila Belbute-Peres et al., 2018, Innes et al., 2019] to learn continuous solution manifolds in complex,
heterogeneous hydraulic conductivity fields without the need for retraining. While these works established the
foundation for parameterized forward modeling, they rest on the assumption that the underlying physical laws
and parameters are deterministically known or statistically characterized.


A Conditioned-on-Design Bayesian Physics Informed Neural Network (CoDe-BPINN)
3
Here, we address both forward and inverse modeling in a probabilistic setting. We consider transport
of iodinated contrast media (ICM), such as, e.g., iohexol and iopamidol. ICMs constitute a distinct class
of persistent micropollutants whose chemical stability and recalcitrance raise significant environmental and
toxicological concerns. These compounds are widely used in medical imaging and are characterized by high
polarity, hydrophilicity, and remarkable chemical stability, rendering them recalcitrant to conventional bio-
logical wastewater treatment processes [Khan et al., 2024, Sengar and Vijayanandan, 2023]. Their ubiquitous
presence in surface water, groundwater, and even drinking water sources poses potential risks, particularly
regarding potential formation of toxic iodinated disinfection byproducts [Kormos et al., 2011, Duirk et al.,
2011]. We apply this framework to the transport of the ICM Iohexol in a stratified sand-clay (laboratory-
scale) column, as described in Khan et al. [2026]. The experimental setup is designed to remove Iohexol via
sorption to an engineered clay material. The effective interface properties are thus critical to characterize the
performance of the system. Here, the effective sorption properties are hypothesized to be a dynamic function
of the experimental design rather than a static constant. Framing the analysis according to the perspective of
Dell’Oca [2023], we explicitly distinguish between operational variables (i.e., controllable operational design
parameters such as fluid flow rate and inlet concentration) and stochastic model parameters (i.e., uncertain
quantities such as sorption affinity and capacity).
Our main objective is to enable the model to autonomously discover state-dependent functional relation-
ships, specifically characterizing the decline of the effective sorption capacity of the porous medium under
diverse flow regimes while rigorously quantifying parametric uncertainty. To achieve this, we propose a prob-
abilistic model, formulated as a Conditioned-on-Design Bayesian Physics Informed Neural Network (CoDe-
BPINN). This architecture integrates a domain-decomposed Bayesian solver (based on the CPINN philosophy)
with a Multivariate Parameter Inference Network, in a conditioning HyperNetwork style [Ha et al., 2016, Chen
et al., 2022, Nichol et al., 2018]. By assuming physical parameters as random variables conditioned to opera-
tional variables we transform the inverse problem into a conditional density estimation task. This formulation
allows us to disentangle the variability arising from operational choices from the lack of knowledge regarding
physical properties of the system, offering a robust basis for process monitoring and experimental design.
Unlike standard Bayesian inversion, which typically infers a posterior distribution of otherwise unknown
model parameters for a single dataset, our framework learns the conditional probability distribution of model
parameters as a function of the operational design space, conditioned on the sparse observational data. By
minimizing a physics-informed Evidence Lower Bound (ELBO), the model aims at achieving the following:
i. Simultaneous Reconstruction and Inference: the model yields a reconstruction of the full spatiotem-
poral concentration field while simultaneously inferring the governing physical parameters, thus effectively
solving the coupled forward-inverse problem in a single differentiable loop.
ii. Understanding Learned Relationships between Physical Parameters: rather than optimizing
static scalar values, the model learns a continuous mapping from operational variables (e.g., flow rate, inlet
solute concentration, or porosity of the domain) to physical coefficients. This allows for the autonomous
discovery of non-linear relationships and the influence of experimental design on estimated properties.
iii. Quantification of Structural Identifiability: by utilizing a multivariate formulation, the framework
explicitly captures the correlation structure between coupled parameters (e.g., the trade-off between affinity
and capacity). This identifies regimes of practical non-identifiability (i.e., equifinality) that deterministic
methods fail to detect.
The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 provides a summary of the experimental
setting and dataset that we consider in our study. Section 3 details the mathematical formulation of the
parameterized Advection-Dispersion-Reaction system and our proposed differentiable Bayesian framework.
Section 4 illustrates and discusses the ensuing numerical results, including validation against high-fidelity
solvers and the analysis of the discovered functional relationships between model parameters. Finally, Section 5
provides key conclusions and outlines future research directions.
2 Experimental Setup and Data Acquisition
Data employed in this study are derived from a comprehensive experimental campaign detailed in Khan et al.
[2026] which is aimed at investigating removal of Iodinated Contrast Media (ICM) agents using engineered
clay adsorbents. We focus on transport of Iohexol through a fixed-bed (laboratory-scale) column packed with
a composite of quartz sand and modified montmorillonite organo-clay (Mt-II), as described in the following.


4
Milad Panahi et al.
Table 1: Summary of the main characteristics of the 9 experimental configurations considered in the study.
Here, q denotes Darcy flux [mL/min]; C0 is Inlet Concentration; and εΩ2 is porosity of the reactive middle
layer of the column (Fig. 1).
Exp ID
Darcy Flux q
Inlet Concentration C0
Porosity εΩ2
Variable Tested
[mL/min]
[mg/L]
[-]
1
1.99
100
0.371
Baseline
2
4.97
100
0.371
Flow Rate
3
12.43
100
0.371
Flow Rate
4
1.99
150
0.371
Concentration
5
1.99
200
0.371
Concentration
6
1.99
250
0.371
Concentration
7
1.99
300
0.371
Concentration
8
1.99
100
0.424
Porosity (Low Clay)
9
1.99
100
0.399
Porosity (Med Clay)
2.1 Materials and Column Configuration
The adsorbent medium consists of a dually-modified montmorillonite (Mt-II), synthesized via sequential in-
tercalation of cationic (CTPC) and anionic (SDS) surfactants to enhance affinity for polar organic micropol-
lutants.
As illustrated in Figure 1, the fixed-bed column domain Ω= [0, L] (with total length of L = 92 mm, an
internal diameter of d = 16 mm, and a cross-sectional area A ≈201.06 mm2) is stratified into the following
three zones to ensure hydraulic stability and prevent washout of fine clay particles:
i. Inlet Zone (Ω1): A 21 mm layer of pure, washed quartz sand (50-70 mesh) acting as a flow distributor.
ii. Reactive Zone (Ω2): A 50 mm central layer comprising the Mt-II organo-clay dispersed within the sand
matrix. This is the sole domain where reactive transport (sorption) occurs. The porosity of this layer, εΩ2
varies depending on the clay packing density.
iii. Outlet Zone (Ω3): A 21 mm layer of pure quartz sand preventing adsorbent migration and stabilizing
the outflow.
2.2 Batch vs. Column Dynamics
Prior to column studies, batch equilibrium experiments were performed to characterize the intrinsic sorption
properties of the Mt-II clay. The ensuing equilibrium data could be interpreted through the Langmuir isotherm
formulation:
qe =
βαCeq
1 + αCeq
(1)
where qe [mg/g] and Ceq [mg/L] denote the surface- and liquid-phase concentrations of Iohexols, respectively;
β [mg/g] is the maximum adsorption capacity of the engineered porous medium, and α [L/mg] is the Langmuir
affinity constant.
Parameters associated with batch experiments (i.e., β and α) represent thermodynamic equilibrium con-
ditions (i.e., for time t →∞). In dynamic column systems, hydrodynamic dispersion and kinetic limitations
(non-equilibrium transport) often result in effective parameters that differ from their batch-grounded coun-
terparts. We treat the batch-derived values (βbatch ≈60 mg/g, αbatch ≈0.03 L/mg) as upper bound priors for
our inverse modeling framework, allowing the CoDe-BPINN to discover the effective model parameters θcol
that are consistent with the hydrodynamic constraints emerging during the experiments.
2.3 Experimental Design and Observational Data
To evaluate transport of Iohexol under a broad range of conditions, a suite of 9 column experiments was
performed (see Table 1). These experiments were designed to assess the response of the system to three key
operational variables:
i. Inlet Concentration (C0), enabling one to investigate the saturation of the adsorbent media (Experi-
ments 1, 4, 5, 6, and 7);


A Conditioned-on-Design Bayesian Physics Informed Neural Network (CoDe-BPINN)
5
Fig. 1: Schematic of the three-layer fixed-bed column experiment. A solution containing the ICM Iohexol is
injected in the column. Iohexol concentration data are collected at discrete observation times from the effluent
at the column outlet.
ii. Darcy Flux (q), to probe hydrodynamic residence time and dispersive effects (Experiments 1, 2, and 3);
iii. Middle Layer Porosity (εΩ2), which serves as a proxy for the clay volume fraction (adsorbent mass)
within the reactive zone (Experiments 1, 8, and 9).
The specific combinations for these 9 experiments are detailed in Table 1. The resulting dataset (hereafter
denoted as Dobs) is composed by the temporal history of concentration recorded at the outlet (also defined as
breakthrough curves) for each case.
3 Methodology: A Differentiable Physics-Informed Learning Framework
We propose a unified computational framework for solving a coupled forward-inverse problem under parametric
uncertainty. The architecture integrates a domain-decomposed Bayesian Neural Network (BNN) solver, de-
noted as S, with a multivariate parameter inference network, Ninv, into a single differentiable computational
graph. This enables simultaneous adherence to sparse observational data and physics-constrained optimization
via gradient-based methods.
3.1 General Framework for Mixed-Deterministic Parameterized PDEs
Let the spatial domain be an open set Ω⊂Rd. We assume that the system of interest can be modelled via
a PDE that is characterized by a vector of operational parameters λ ∈Λ ⊂Rdλ and a vector of unknown
physical parameters θ ∈Θ ⊂Rdθ. The relationship between parameters and the solution field C(x, λ, θ)
is implicitly defined by a differential operator. We approximate the unknown C(x, λ, θ) using a domain-
decomposed Bayesian neural network (the solver S), parameterized by weights ψ. At the same time, we
approximate the inverse parameter map using a multivariate network Ninv characterized by internal parameters
ϕ. We define a PDE residual operator F and a boundary residual operator B. The parameterized PDE problem
is to find a surrogate solution ˆC for each instance λ ∈Λ such that:
F[x, λ, θ; ˆC] = 0,
∀x ∈Ω
(2)
B[x, λ, θ; ˆC] = 0,
∀x ∈∂Ω
(3)
Within the taxonomy of Scientific Machine Learning, this represents a Mixed Deterministic PDE Problem
[Zhang et al., 2019]. While the operator F is deterministic, but the full solution field is unknown, only


6
Milad Panahi et al.
sparse measurements (Dobs) are available at the domain outlet. Furthermore, the physical parameters θ are
unknown and must be inferred. While intrinsic material properties are in principle independent of experimental
design, we adopt a standard conceptual picture according to which the corresponding effective values of these
parameters might exhibit dependencies on the operational design parameters (i.e., θ ≈g(λ)). In our test case,
this might be due to unresolved non-equilibrium dynamics or scaling effects leading to dependencies between
surface reaction and transport in certain experimental regimes. Our primary goal is to simultaneously learn the
forward solution map G : (x, λ) 7→C and the inverse map, which infers the parameter distribution consistent
with the observations, i.e., Ginv : (λ, Dobs) 7→qϕ(θ|λ), where qϕ(θ|λ) represents the posterior distribution of
the physical parameters conditional to operational parameters.
Neural Network Solver. we introduce a dual-network architecture that approximates the unknown solution
map and the inverse parameter map through parameterized neural networks, as depicted in Figure 2. A primary
BPINN (S), designed analogously to a CPINN [Jagtap et al., 2020b] and composed of three sub-domain solvers
{N Ω1, N Ω2, andN Ω3}, acts as an approximator of the unknown solution C. This network is coupled with a
secondary network devoted to inverse modeling (Ninv), which learns a probabilistic mapping from operational
parameters to the latent physical parameters. In this context,
– The Forward Solution C(x, λ) is approximated by a domain-decomposed Bayesian Neural Network (the
Solver S) with variational weights ψ = {ψ1, ψ2, ψ3} and yields a predictive distribution P( ˆC|x, λ; ψ) as
output.
– The Inverse Map for θ is approximated by a multivariate Parameter Network (Ninv) with weights ϕ; as
output, it yields the conditional statistics of the physical parameters, namely the mean vector µln θ(λ; ϕ)
and the Cholesky factor of the corresponding covariance matrix Lln θ(λ; ϕ).
The parameters of all networks Φ = {ψ, ϕ} are optimized simultaneously by minimizing a composite
physics-informed loss function that enforces the operators F and B on the network outputs and minimizes
discrepancies with the sparse observational data Dobs.
Coupled Training vs. Decoupled Inference. While the solver S and the Parameter Inference Network Ninv
are jointly trained to ensure physical consistency, they operate as independent modules during inference.
Once training is complete, information about physical parameters estimates θ is implicitly encoded within
the solver weights ψ across the operational design space λ. Consequently, S serves as a standalone forward
surrogate, enabling evaluation of the output variable without further queries to the inference network. At the
same time, the trained Ninv can be independently queried to explicitly characterize the relationship between
operational and physical parameters and, for instance, parameterize alternative numerical solvers, such as the
Finite Difference Method (FDM) reference scheme employed in this study.
3.2 Problem definition: The Parameterized Advection-Dispersion-Reaction System
We consider a physical system encompassing transient one-dimensional transport of the Iodinated Contrast
Media (ICM) agent Iohexol across the saturated, stratified fixed-bed porous medium column described in
Section 2.
The system is characterized by the three operational design parameters introduced in Section 2.3. These
are here used to characterize the system under diverse conditions and are grouped into the operational design
vector λ = [εΩ2, q, C0]⊤. Unknown effective physical properties of the porous system are encapsulated in the
stochastic parameter vector θ = [aLs, aLc, α, β]⊤. These are defined as:
– aLs, aLc: Longitudinal dispersivities for sand and clay layers [mm], respectively.
– α: Langmuir sorption affinity constant [L/mg].
– β: Maximum sorption capacity [mg/g].
These parameters are piecewise constant in space, i.e. they are assumed constant within each layer, and
are inferred by the network using available measurements Dobs, collected for various combinations of the
operational design parameters λ.
The spatiotemporal evolution of solute concentrations system is described by the one-dimensional Advection-
Dispersion-Reaction (ADR) equation. We formulate the problem in terms of a dimensionless concentration,
ˆC(x, λ) = C(x, t)/C0, where x = (x, t). The PDE operator, F, is defined as:
F[ ˆC] := ∂ˆC
∂t RL(x, ˆC; λ, θ) −∂
∂x

DL(x; λ, θ)∂ˆC
∂x

+ vx(x; λ)∂ˆC
∂x = 0
(4)


A Conditioned-on-Design Bayesian Physics Informed Neural Network (CoDe-BPINN)
7
The pore water velocity is vx(x; λ) = q/ε(x), where ε(x) is the local porosity. The dispersion coefficient is
modeled as DL = aL(x)|vx| + D∗[mm2/min], where aL(x) takes the value aLc in Ω2 and aLs elsewhere. The
effective diffusion coefficient is defined as D∗= 1.0 × 10−6 · (ε(x)4/3) [mm2/min].
The non-linear Langmuir Retardation Factor, RL, is active only in the reactive layer (Ω2) and is defined
as:
RL(x, ˆC; λ, θ) = 1 + IΩ2(x) ρb
ε(x)

αβ
(1 + αC0 ˆC)2

(5)
where IΩ2 is the indicator function restricting sorption to the clay layer Ω2, and ρb is the bulk density
[mg/mm3]. Note that the formulation explicitly retains the inlet concentration C0 [mg/L] in the denominator,
capturing the concentration-dependent non-linearity of the Langmuir equilibrium adsorption model [Fetter
et al., 1999].
The system is subject to the boundary operator B, with the following boundary and initial conditions:







ˆC(x, t = 0) = 0,
∀x ∈Ω
(Initial Condition)
(6a)
ˆC(x = 0, t) = 1,
∀t > 0
(Inlet Dirichlet BC)
(6b)
∂ˆC
∂x (x = L, t) = 0
∀t > 0
(Outlet Neumann BC)
(6c)
3.3 Bayesian Physics Informed Neural Network (BPINN) Formulation
As stated in Section 3, we adopt here a Bayesian approach. In contrast to deterministic PINNs, where the
network weights are fixed after training and represent single (point) estimates, we instead model both the solver
weights ψ and the physical parameters θ as random variables, thereby explicitly accounting for uncertainty
in their values.
Our goal is to compute the joint posterior distribution of these quantities, conditioned on the observational
data Dobs and the governing physical laws, for a given set of operational design parameters λ. The physical
constraints are defined by the operators F[ ˆC; λ, θ] = 0 and B[ ˆC; λ, θ] = 0. Using Bayes’ theorem, the full
(joint) posterior is:
p(ψ, θ|Dobs, λ) ∝p(Dobs|ψ, θ, λ)p(ψ, θ|λ)
(7)
where p(Dobs|ψ, θ, λ) is the data likelihood. The prior, p(ψ, θ|λ), can be factored by assuming the solver
weights ψ are independent of the operational design space λ, yielding p(ψ, θ|λ) = p(ψ)p(θ|λ). Here, p(ψ) is
the prior distribution of the network weights, and p(θ|λ) is the informative prior that reflects our assumptions
of the way physical parameters depend on the operational design parameters. Following standard BPINN
methodology, we incorporate the physical constraints as a ”physics likelihood” term, p(F, B|ψ, θ, λ). While
the form of this distribution is a mere modeling choice, we assume here for simplicity and tractability that the
PDE residuals are distributed according to a zero-mean Gaussian, i.e., p(F|·) ∝exp(−||F||2):
p(ψ, θ|Dobs, F, B, λ) ∝p(Dobs|ψ, θ, λ)p(F, B|ψ, θ, λ)p(ψ)p(θ|λ)
(8)
The exact computation of this posterior requires evaluating the model evidence, or marginal likelihood,
p(Dobs, F, B|λ), which involves an intractable high-dimensional integral over ψ and θ. Hence, we employ Vari-
ational Inference (VI) to approximate the true posterior. We introduce a parameterized family of variational
distributions, i.e. qψ(ψ) for the solver weights and qϕ(θ|λ) for the physical parameters. The training objective
is then to minimize the Kullback-Leibler divergence (DKL) between this approximation and the true posterior,
which is equivalent to maximizing the Evidence Lower Bound (ELBO):
LELBO = Eqψqϕ [ln p(Dobs|ψ, θ, λ) + ln p(F, B|ψ, θ, λ)] −DKL[qψ(ψ)||p(ψ)] −DKL[qϕ(θ|λ)||p(θ)]
(9)
The terms formulated as expectation quantify the quality of the reconstruction by capturing agreement with
observed data as well as consistency with the governing physics, while the KL divergence terms act as regulariz-
ers. In practice, this objective is implemented as the composite trainable loss function detailed in Section 3.5.4,
where expectations are approximated via Monte Carlo sampling. To enable gradient-based optimization, we
adopt the reparameterization scheme proposed in[Kingma and Welling, 2022], where stochastic variables are
expressed as w = µ + σ ⊙ϵ with ϵ ∼N(0, I), thereby allowing backpropagation through the Bayesian network
solver.


8
Milad Panahi et al.
3.4 From Likelihood-based formulations to a Trainable Loss Function
The ELBO in Eq. 9 involves evaluating the log-likelihood of the physical constraints, ln p(F, B|ψ, θ, λ). A key
step in BPINNs is therefore to recast these constraints, originally expressed as deterministic equalities (e.g.,
F[ ˆC; λ, θ] = 0), into a probabilistic framework. Following standard approaches [Yang et al., 2021], we treat
the PDE residuals as noisy observations with zero mean and an associated precision (i.e., inverse variance).
Specifically, we assume the likelihood of the PDE residuals to be described through a Gaussian distribution:
p(F|ψ, θ, λ) ∝exp
 
−1
2σ2
F
Nf
X
j=1
||F[ ˆC; xj, λ, θ]||2
!
(10)
Here, σ2
F represents the variance associated with the residuals associated with the differential operator, thereby
controlling the tolerance allowed for deviations from the governing equation. Maximizing the corresponding
log-likelihood is equivalent to minimizing the Mean Squared Error (MSE) of the PDE residuals. Analogous
likelihood terms are defined for the boundary (B) and initial (I) conditions, as well as, within our domain-
decomposed architecture, for interface continuity constraints, which are formally defined in the following in
Section 3.5.4.
The training objective involves evaluating the expected log-likelihood terms appearing in the ELBO (Eq. 9),
where expectation is taken with respect to the joint variational posterior of the latent variables. Under the
assumption that the solver weights and physical parameters are independent within the variational approxi-
mation, this joint density factorizes as qψ(ψ)·qϕ(θ|λ). Since an analytical evaluation of this high-dimensional
expectation is unfeasible due to the non-linear structure of the neural networks, we approximate it via Monte
Carlo sampling at each training iteration. Specifically, at each training iteration we sample the solver weights
ψ from their variational posterior qψ(ψ) and the physical parameters θ from the Parameter Inference
Network (Ninv). The latter represents the variational distribution qϕ(θ|λ) by outputting the mean µln θ and
the Cholesky factor Lln θ of the log-parameter covariance matrix, as introduced in Section 3.1. This sampling
procedure converts the ELBO from a theoretical formulation into a tractable stochastic objective. In this
setting, the expected log-likelihood terms naturally correspond to the MSE loss terms typical of deterministic
PINNs, scaled (i.e., weighted) by their corresponding inverse variances. This directly leads to the compos-
ite loss function described in Section 3.5.4, yielding a computationally tractable framework for training the
CoDe-BPINN.
3.5 Physics Informed Neural Solver and Network Architecture
The proposed framework consists of two coupled components: the Forward Phase Solver S and the Inverse
Phase Parameter Network Ninv, as illustrated in Figure 2.
3.5.1 Forward Phase: The Solver (S)
To capture the sharp gradients at the interfaces between the layers associated with the diverse porous materials
forming the column, we employ an Conservative PINN (CPINN) architecture. The solver S is decomposed
into the three independent sub-networks, {N Ωi(·; ψi)}3
i=1, each corresponding to a given layer, {Ωi}3
i=1, in
the system. The main features of each of these sub-networks include the following:
– Architecture: Each sub-network N Ωi is a Bayesian Neural Network. The variational weights/biases ψi
are modeled as independent Gaussian random variables N(µw, σ2
w) (N(·, ·) denoting Gaussian).
– Conditioning: The sub-networks are conditioned via direct input concatenation. For a given point x in
the domain and operational design vector λ, the input is k = [γ(x), λ], where γ(·) is a Fourier feature
embedding that is employed to mitigate spectral bias [Tancik et al., 2020, Anagnostopoulos et al., 2026].
– Output: As outputs, each sub-network yields the parameters (mean and variance) of a normal distri-
bution representing the model predictive uncertainty for the dimensionless concentration ˆC within its
corresponding subdomain Ωi:
P( ˆC|x, λ; ψi) = N  µ ˆ
C(x, λ; ψi), σ2
ˆ
C(x, λ; ψi)
(11)
3.5.2 Inverse Phase: The Parameter Inference Network (Ninv)
As stated in our Bayesian formulation (Section 3.3), our goal is to approximate the posterior distribution of
the physical parameters θ with a variational distribution, qϕ(θ|λ). This task is carried out by the Parameter
Inference Network, Ninv. The latter is a deterministic neural network, parameterized by weights ϕ, that


A Conditioned-on-Design Bayesian Physics Informed Neural Network (CoDe-BPINN)
9
Fig. 2: Schematic of the coupled CoDe-BPINN framework. Inverse Phase: The Parameter Network Ninv
maps the operational design parameters λ onto the estimated statistics (µln θ, Lln θ) of the physical parameters,
qϕ(θ|λ). Forward Phase: The Solver S, composed of three Bayesian sub-networks (N Ωi), takes concatenated
inputs (x, λ) and provides as outputs the concentration field, P( ˆC|x, λ; ψ). To form the composite loss, samples
from both the solver and parameter network are fed into the PDE (F) and Boundary (B) operators to evaluate
the physics-based residuals (fx,λ, bx,λ). At the same time, the solver’s outputs at the outlet section of the
system are compared against the sparse observational data (Dobs) to compute a likelihood loss (Jdata). All
components forming the loss are then aggregated into the final composite loss, J (detailed in Section 3.5.4),
which is minimized during training.
maps the operational design parameters λ to the mean and covariance matrix of a multivariate Log-Normal
distribution for θ. Relying on a Log-Normal distribution ensures that the inferred physical parameters remain
strictly positive. The network outputs are:
[µln θ(λ; ϕ), Lln θ(λ; ϕ)] = Ninv(λ; ϕ)
(12)
where µln θ ∈Rdθ is the vector whose entries are the means of the log-transformed parameters, and Lln θ ∈
Rdθ×dθ is the lower-triangular Cholesky factor of the corresponding covariance matrix. This formulation en-
ables the model to learn the correlation structure between parameters, which is critical to quantify practical
non-identifiability. During training, samples of the physical parameter are generated using a reparameteri-
zation scheme, expressed as ln θ = µln θ + Lln θz where z ∼N(0, I). This formulation enables end-to-end
differentiability of the framework while allowing quantification of the parametric uncertainty in the inverse
solution.
3.5.3 Parameterization and Prior Beliefs
To regularize the inverse problem, we introduce an informative hyperprior, p(θ), which enters the KL divergence
term of the ELBO (Eq. 9). This prior encodes our domain knowledge and constrains the (admissible) search
space of the physical parameter vector θ, as defined in Section 3.2. We model p(θ) as a multivariate Log-
Normal distribution, which is tantamount to assigning independent Gaussian priors to each log-parameter
component j = 1, . . . , dθ: ln θj ∼N(µp,j, σ2
p,j). Based on physical considerations and preliminary numerical
simulations, these priors are defined as follows::
– Longitudinal Dispersivities (aLs, aLc): Guided by the classically observed scaling that dispersivity
is on the order of one-tenth of the characteristic travel length, priors for log-dispersivity are centered at
µp,1 = ln(2.0) and µp,2 = ln(5.0) for the sand layers and for the more heterogeneous clay layer, respectively.
The corresponding scales (standard deviations) are set to σp,j = 0.5 for j = 1, 2.
– Sorption Capacity (β): Preliminary batch (equilibrium) experiments suggest an adsorption capacity
of β ≈60 mg/g. Otherwise, effective capacity observed under dynamic column conditions is typically
lower. This is mainly due to effects associated with, e.g., pore-scale flow heterogeneities (reflected through


10
Milad Panahi et al.
channeling) and kinetic limitations (associated with finite mass-transfer rates) that prevent the system from
reaching equilibrium within the residence time of the flowing fluid. To account for these effects and provide
sufficient flexibility in the inference process, we center the prior for ln β at a reduced value of µp,4 = ln(40)
(where β is expressed in mg/g). A relatively large standard deviation of σp,4 = 1.0 is prescribed, enabling
the Parameter Inference Network (Ninv) to capture potential dependencies on operational conditions, such
as flow rate, directly from the data.
– Sorption Affinity (α): Preliminary batch equilibrium tests suggest an affinity coefficient α ≈0.03
L/mg. However, breakthrough curves obtained under dynamic column conditions are observed to exhibit
significant spreading, indicative of a lower effective affinity. These discrepancies might arise from transport-
related effects such as, e.g., dispersion, flow heterogeneity, and rate-limited sorption. To reflect these effects
and maintain flexibility in the inference, we prescribe a weak prior for ln α upon centering the latter at
a substantially lower value of µp,3 = ln(3 × 10−3) L/mg, with a comparatively large standard deviation
of σp,3 = 1.0. This broad prior enables the coupled framework to infer the appropriate balance between
dispersive spreading and nonlinear adsorption (self-sharpening) effects that best explains the observed
data.
3.5.4 Physics-Informed Composite Loss
Optimization of the parameters of all networks, Φ = {ψ, ϕ}, is performed through minimization of a composite
loss function J . The latter provides a tractable implementation of the negative ELBO derived in Section 3.3.
The negative log-likelihood contributions associated with the physical constraints are expressed as weighted
Mean Squared Error (MSE) terms (as established in Section 3.4). This leads to the following scalar objective
function:
J = wdataJdata + wpdeJpde + wbcJbc + wicJic + wintJint + wklJkl
(13)
Here, the boundary-related contribution from the theoretical formulation (B) is decomposed into distinct terms
corresponding to boundary (Jbc), initial (Jic), and interface (Jint) conditions. This decomposition allows for
finer control of the optimization process through the weighting coefficients w(·). The contributions appearing
in Eq. (13) are defined in the following.
Residual Components.
– Data Likelihood (Jdata): This term represents the negative log-likelihood of the observational data,
−ln p(Dobs|ψ, θ). It is evaluated as the Negative Log-Likelihood (NLL) of the sparse breakthrough mea-
surements at the column outlet, computed using the predictive distribution provided by the outlet sub-
network N Ω3.
– PDE Residuals (Jpde): This term corresponds to the negative log-likelihood associated with the PDE
residuals, −ln p(F|·), as defined in Eq. 10. The expectation under the variational posterior is approximated
via Monte Carlo sampling. At each training step, we draw samples of physical parameter values θ ∼qϕ(θ|λ)
and network weights ψ ∼qψ(ψ), evaluate the residual F[ ˆC], and minimize its magnitude. This contribution
is computed independently across each of the subdomains of the column.
– Boundary/Initial Conditions (Jbc, Jic): These terms represent the MSE counterparts of the log-
likelihoods associated with the boundary and initial conditions, enforcing the constraints specified in Eq. 6
on the corresponding sub-networks.
– Interface Continuity (Jint): Within the domain-decomposed CPINN solver, continuity conditions are
enforced at the material interfaces between adjacent layers. Notably, both the state ( ˆC) and the total
flux (denoted here as Jflux) required to satisfy continuity across the material interfaces, to enforce mass
conservation across internal boundaries. Considering vector xint = [21, 71] mm to denote location of the
interfaces along the column, the corresponding continuity constraint reads as:
Jint =
2
X
k=1
 || ˆCk(xint,k) −ˆCk+1(xint,k)||2 + ||Jflux,k(xint,k) −Jflux,k+1(xint,k)||2
(14)
where the total flux is given by Jflux = vx ˆC −DL∂x ˆC.
– Regularization (Jkl): The regularization term, scaled by an annealing weigthing coefficient wkl, consists
of two distinct KL divergence contributions that penalize deviations of the learned variational distributions
from the prior specifications introduced in Section 3.5.3.
Jkl = Jkl,S + Jkl,Ninv =
3
X
i=1
DKL[qψi(ψi)||p(ψi)] + DKL[qϕ(θ|λ)||p(θ)]
(15)


A Conditioned-on-Design Bayesian Physics Informed Neural Network (CoDe-BPINN)
11
– Solver Weight Regularization: For the BNN solver, we adopt a standard Gaussian prior over the
weights, p(ψ) = N(0, I). The corresponding regularization term is given by the sum of the analytical
KL divergences between the variational posterior qψi(ψi) of each of the three sub-networks and its
prior:
Jkl,S =
3
X
i=1
DKL[qψi(ψi)||p(ψi)]
(16)
– Physical Parameter Regularization: we impose an informative prior, p(θ), modeled as a multi-
variate Log-Normal distribution as detailed in Section 3.5.3. The Parameter Inference Network (Ninv)
yields the key statistics of the variational distribution qϕ(ln θ|λ), which is also modeled as a multi-
variate Gaussian. The corresponding KL divergence between the variational posterior and the prior is
evaluated in closed form as:
Jkl,Ninv = DKL[qϕ||p] = 1
2

tr(Σ−1
p Σq)
|
{z
}
Trace Term
+ (µp −µq)⊤Σ−1
p (µp −µq)
|
{z
}
Mahalanobis Distance
−dθ +
ln |Σp|
|Σq|
| {z }
Log-Determinant Term

(17)
where Σq = Lln θL⊤
ln θ, and dθ = 4 denotes the dimensionality of the physical parameter vector. This
term is key in regularizing the inverse problem. The Trace Term penalizes overly large posterior vari-
ances; the Mahalanobis Distance anchors the mean estimate toward the prior (scaled by uncertainty);
and the Log-Determinant Term prevents the distribution from collapsing to a point estimate (corre-
sponding to a degenerate solution).
Probabilistic Interpretation of Loss Weights. We recall that in the probabilistic framework we consider, while
observational data are naturally associated with measurement noise, the residuals of the governing equations
(e.g., PDE, boundary, and initial conditions) are modeled as zero-mean Gaussian random variables (i.e.,
p(F) ∝exp(−
1
2σ2
F ||F||2)) with constant variance. In this context, the associated variances do not represent
measurement uncertainty. They are rather interpreted as tolerance parameters that control the extent at which
each physical constraint is enforced. Under this assumption, maximizing the corresponding log-likelihoods is
equivalent to minimizing weighted mean squared error (MSE) terms, where the corresponding weights are
inversely proportional to the variance (or tolerance) σ2 of each physical constraint, up to a constant factor:
wi =
1
2σ2
i
=⇒
σi =
1
√2wi
(18)
Since all state variables are normalized to the interval [0, 1], the parameters σi can be interpreted as relative
tolerance levels for each constraint, expressed with respect to the characteristic scale of the (normalized)
solution (i.e., relative to the inlet concentration C0). Within this probabilistic framework, the corresponding
weights therefore control the strength with which each contribution is enforced. In this study, we adopt a
hierarchical weighting strategy to stabilize the inverse problem. Boundary, initial, and interface conditions are
assigned the largest weights (wbc, wic, wint = 8×104) corresponding to a stringent tolerance (σ ≈0.25% of the
unit interval), thereby ensuring strong enforcement of these constraints. The data is weighted as wdata ≈200,
reflecting a measurement uncertainty of ≈5%. Conversely, the PDE residual is assigned a moderately lower
weight (wpde = 5 × 103), corresponding to a tolerance of ≈1%, which allows for controlled flexibility in
satisfying the governing equations. Weighting of the KL regularization term, wkl, is determined as described
in SI Section 2. This soft-constrained formulation avoids an excessively stiff optimization landscape, thereby
enabling the Parameter Inference Network to effectively explore the parameter space and identify dependencies
that best reconcile physical consistency with observational data.
3.6 Training via a Multi-Stage Curriculum
Directly optimizing the coupled forward-inverse problem is significantly challenging, primarily due to the
cold start issue. At this stage, the sub-networks composing S are not yet consistent across interfaces, and
the Parameter Inference Network (Ninv) produces essentially uninformative physical parameter estimates.
Enforcing the full set of PDE constraints from the outset can therefore lead to optimization pathologies, such
as the emergence of unphysical high-frequency artifacts that locally satisfy the differential operator while
violating global boundary and data constraints.


12
Milad Panahi et al.
To mitigate these issues, we employ a multi-stage curriculum learning strategy, extending the sequential
training protocols introduced in our previous work on parameterized solvers [Panahi et al., 2026] to the present
coupled inverse setting. Consistent with broader observations on PINN optimization challenges [Krishnapriyan
et al., 2021, Penwarden et al., 2023], this approach stabilizes training by progressively increasing the complexity
of the objective. In particular, it ensures that the network first learns to satisfy boundary and initial conditions
before enforcing the full set of physics-based constraints. The procedure is formalized in Algorithm 1.
Algorithm 1: Three-Stage Curriculum Training for CoDe-BPINN
Input: Operational design parameters λ, Collocation points x, Observational Data Dobs
Result: Optimized Solver weights ψ∗, Parameter Inference Network weights ϕ∗
1 Initialize Solver weights ψ and Parameter Inference Network weights ϕ
2 Freeze ϕ (Ninv) and fix physical parameters θ to prior means
// Stage 1: Boundary and Interface Initialization
3 for epoch ←1 to E1 do
4
Compute Boundary Jbc and Initial Jic
5
Update ψ to minimize JStage1 = wbcJbc + wicJic
// Stage 2: Data Anchoring
6 for epoch ←1 to E2 do
7
Compute Data Likelihood Jdata (NLL) at outlet
8
Update ψ to minimize JStage2 = JStage1 + wdataJdata
// Stage 3: Forward-Inverse Coupling
9 Unfreeze ϕ (Ninv)
10 for epoch ←1 to E3 do
11
Update KL weight wkl via annealing schedule
12
Sample physical parameters: θ ∼qϕ(θ|λ)
13
Compute PDE Residuals Jpde and Interface loss Jint using sampled θ
14
Compute Regularization Jkl for both ψ and ϕ
15
Update [ψ, ϕ] to minimize Jtotal = JStage2 + wpdeJpde + wintJint + wklJkl
16 return ψ, ϕ
Stage 1: Boundary and Initial initialization. Training commences upon optimizing the solver S solely on
boundary (Jbc) and initial (Jic) conditions. The PDE residuals and interface continuity terms are deacti-
vated during this phase. This enables the sub-networks to learn valid representations of the spatiotemporal
boundaries for each subdomain.
Stage 2: Data Anchoring. Once the boundary representations are stable, we introduce the data likelihood term
(Jdata). At this stage, the solver updates its posterior to fit the sparse observational data (i.e., concentration
tempral history at the column outlet) while the PDE residual remains inactive. The model therefore operates
as a probabilistic regressor, learning a solution manifold that is consistent with both boundary conditions and
available observations. This stage effectively anchors the solution in data-informed regions, reducing risks of
convergence to unphysical local minima when the physics-based constraints are subsequently enforced.
Stage 3: Forward-Inverse Coupling. In the final phase, the PDE residual (Jpde) and interface continuity (Jint)
loss terms are activated, and the Parameter Inference Network (Ninv) is incorporated into the training process,
thereby closing the inverse loop. At this stage, the optimization must reconcile the data-anchored solution
with the governing ADR equation. Since the solver already provides a good quality fit to the observations,
minimizing the PDE residual primarily drives updates in the Parameter Inference Network, thus guiding
the inference of the physical coefficients θ required for physical consistency. Concurrently, the interface loss
enforces continuity between sub-networks, ensuring global consistency of both the state (i.e., concentration)
and the flux across the domain.
3.7 Validation of Uncertainty Estimates
To assess model performance, we employ a comparative Monte Carlo analysis using both the trained CoDe-
BPINN and a reference FDM solver (see Supplementary Information, Section 1). The total predictive uncer-


A Conditioned-on-Design Bayesian Physics Informed Neural Network (CoDe-BPINN)
13
tainty of the CoDe-BPINN is estimated by generating an ensemble of T stochastic forward evaluations. For
each realization t, we sample both the network weights ψt ∼qψ(ψ) and the physical parameters θt ∼qϕ(θ|λ).
The resulting ensemble of results, { ˆC(x; ψt, θt)}T
t=1, captures the total predictive uncertainty, encompassing
variability due to both parameter inference and the neural surrogate approximation. To establish a reference
ground truth for the parametric contribution, we rely on the trained Parameter Inference Network (Ninv) to
generate input samples for the FDM simulator. We draw realizations of physical parameters θt ∼qϕ(θ|λ)
and evaluate the FDM solver for each sample. The variance of the ensuing (FDM-based) ensemble provides
an estimate of the uncertainty propagated solely from the inferred physical parameters (hereafter denoted as
σ2
θ).
Comparing these two ensembles provides a basis for validation of the CoDe-BPINN results. In principle,
the total (predictive) uncertainty of the CoDe-BPINN should encompass the parametric uncertainty obtained
from the FDM-based ensemble, as it additionally accounts for the approximation error of the neural surro-
gate. In regions with limited observational data, uncertainty is expected to be dominated by the parametric
component, reflecting the inherent non-uniqueness of the inverse problem. Conversely, near the data-rich out-
let, the parametric uncertainty should reduce significantly, leaving only the residual measurement noise and
surrogate-related uncertainty. This comparison offers a robust assessment of the reliability of the proposed
modeling framework.
4 Results and Discussion
In this section, we evaluate the performance of the proposed CoDe-BPINN framework. The analysis is struc-
tured to assess two distinct capabilities: (1) the accuracy of the Forward Surrogate (the solver S) in
reproducing the spatiotemporal concentration field compared to a high-fidelity numerical reference, and (2)
the ability of the Inverse Parameter Network (Ninv) to estimate the unknown physical parameters and
their dependencies on the operational design parameters.
4.1 Experimental Dataset and Operational design Space
The CoDe-BPINN framework was trained on the dataset Dobs comprising 9 experimental breakthrough curves
(BTCs) obtained from the experimental setup described in Section 2.
Data Preprocessing and Normalization. As illustrated in the network architecture (Fig. 2), all network inputs
are normalized to ensure numerical stability during training. Spatial coordinates x are scaled by the column
length (L = 92 mm), time t is normalized by the maximum experimental duration (Tmax), and the opera-
tional design parameter vector λ = [εΩ2, q, C0]⊤is mapped to the support [0, 1] via min-max normalization.
Importantly, while the networks operate in this normalized space, the physics-informed loss terms (i.e., the
PDE and Interface Continuity residuals) are evaluated in the actual physical domain. To ensure consistency,
network outputs are transformed back to physical units during training, and the gradients obtained through
automated differentiation are appropriately rescaled (e.g.,
1
L
∂
∂xnorm ) so that the governing equations (Eq. 4)
are enforced in their correct physical form.
Fixed System Parameters. While the operational design vector λ defines the diverse experimental conditions,
the geometric configuration (Section 2.1) and material properties of the non-reactive components are kept
constant across all experiments. The inert sand layers (Ω1 and Ω3) are characterized by a fixed porosity of
εΩ1 = εΩ3 = 0.43, bulk density of the porous medium being set to ρb = 1.5 × 10−3 g/mm3). These quantities
are treated as known constants and are embedded directly within the PDE residual operator during training.
4.2 Surrogate Modeling Performance
The primary objective of the Forward Phase is to learn a continuous, parameterized solution manifold ˆC(x, λ)
that accurately reproduces the observed transport dynamics. Figure 3 depicts a comprehensive comparison
of the CoDe-BPINN results against the experimental data across the three axes of variation, illustrating the
ability of the model to capture the observed breakthrough behavior.
These results demonstrate that the solver S has successfully learned to characterize the complex, non-linear
dependencies governing the system. As shown in Fig. 3a, the model accurately captures the concentration-
dependent behavior, including the characteristic self-sharpening of the breakthrough front and the earlier
breakthrough times observed at higher inlet concentrations (C0). As C0 increases from 100 to 300 mg/L,


14
Milad Panahi et al.
Fig. 3: Comparison of CoDe-BPINN surrogate results (solid curves) with available experimental observations
(dots) at the column outlet (x = L). Concentrations are expressed in dimensionless form as ˆC = C/C0.
Shaded regions denote the total predictive uncertainty (corresponding to 95% CI) estimated via Monte Carlo
sampling. The model accurately captures the non-linear variations in breakthrough time and breakthrough
curve shape associated with changes in the operational variables, i.e., (a) inlet concentration C0, (b) Darcy
flux q, and (c) porosity εΩ2.
adsorption sites saturate more rapidly, leading to a leftward shift of the breakthrough curve. The CoDe-
BPINN reproduces these sharp fronts without introducing spurious oscillations, highlighting the effectiveness
of the Fourier embedding in representing high-frequency features. In Fig. 3b, variations in Darcy flux (q) induce
substantial changes in residence time. The model successfully captures the transition from advection-dominated
transport (steep breakthrough curve at q = 12.43 [mm/min]) to dispersion-dominated regimes (broader curves
at q = 1.99 [mm/min]). Dynamics resulting from our modeling framework remain consistent with experimental
observations across timescales spanning approximately one order of magnitude. Similarly, Fig. 3c illustrates
the impact of the porosity of the middle layer, εΩ2, which serves as a proxy for the adsorbent mass fraction.
The model correctly learns that lower porosity (corresponding to higher clay content, εΩ2 = 0.371) leads
to significantly increased retardation capacity compared to a sand-dominated matrix (εΩ2 = 0.424), shifting
breakthrough time from ≈30 minutes to ≈440 minutes.
Furthermore, the uncertainty bands (shaded regions) tightly envelop experimental observations, indicating
that the Bayesian solver captures the underlying structure.
4.3 Surrogate Accuracy and Uncertainty Calibration
A primary objective of our framework is to develop a CoDe-BPINN that enables unknown parameter inference
while at the same time serving as an accurate and reliable forward surrogate. To assess this capability, we com-
pare the predictive distribution obtained through CoDe-BPINN against a high-fidelity Monte Carlo ensemble
generated through a Finite Difference Method (FDM) solver (as detailed in SI, Section 1). The FDM simu-
lations are driven by realizations of the physical parameters sampled from the posterior distribution learned
by the Parameter Network (Ninv), thus enabling a consistent evaluation of both the predictive mean and the
propagated uncertainty.
Figure 4 illustrates this comparison for the baseline experiment test case (λ = [εΩ2 = 0.371, q = 1.99 mm/min, C0 =
100 mg/L]).
Accuracy of Mean Predictions. The spatiotemporal mean field inferred by our CoDe-BPINN (Fig. 4a) exhibits
excellent visual and quantitative agreement with the corresponding FDM ensemble mean (Fig. 4b). Both
approaches accurately reproduce the key physical mechanisms, including rapid advective transport in the inert
sand layers (Ω1, Ω3) and significant retardation within the reactive clay layer (Ω2). The point-wise difference
map (Fig. 4c) reveals that the largest discrepancies are localized along the sharp concentration front, where
steep gradients pose challenges for neural approximators. Nevertheless, the overall relative Rel.L2
ˆ
C(x) between
the two mean fields is only 4.3%, confirming that the CoDe-BPINN has recovered a physically consistent
solution manifold. This agreement is further supported at the outlet (Fig. 4d), where the CoDe-BPINN mean
breakthrough curve (magenta) closely matches its FDM-based reference counterpart (black dashed), with
Rel.L2
ˆ
C(x = L, t) = 1.9%. The same panel also illustrates the total predictive uncertainty of the solver S
(95% CI, σS
total, shown in shaded cyan) alongside the reference parametric uncertainty propagated through
the FDM solver (95% CI, σθ; shown in shaded grey). As detailed in the uncertainty quantification procedure
(Section 3.7), σθ is obtained upon evaluating the deterministic FDM solver over realizations of θ sampled from
the learned variational distribution qϕ(θ|λ).


A Conditioned-on-Design Bayesian Physics Informed Neural Network (CoDe-BPINN)
15
Fig. 4: Ensemble-based validation of the CoDe-BPINN surrogate. Comparison between CoDe-
BPINN results against an FDM-based Monte Carlo ensemble (N = 1000) for the baseline setting λ =
[0.371, 1.99, 100]. (a) Mean CoDe-BPINN field E[ ˆCS(x, t)]. (b) Reference mean field from the FDM-based
ensemble E[ ˆCF DM(x, t)]. (c) Point-wise difference between the two mean fields. (d) Comparison of the outlet
breakthrough curves and related uncertainty. (e) Spatiotemporal distribution of the CoDe-BPINN epistemic
uncertainty (σS). (f) Spatiotemporal distribution of the parameter-induced uncertainty obtained from the
FDM ensemble (σθ).
Fig. 5: Ensemble-based validation for an intermediate clay content of the adsorbent layer
(εΩ2 = 0.399). Comparison between CoDe-BPINN results and an FDM ensemble (N = 1000) for the ex-
periment ID 9 (see Table 1), corresponding to a medium clay content configuration (λ = [0.399, 1.99, 100]. (a)
Mean CoDe-BPINN field E[ ˆCS(x, t)]. (b) Reference mean field from the FDM ensemble E[ ˆCF DM(x, t)]. (c)
Point-wise difference between the mean fields. (d) Comparison of the outlet breakthrough curves and related
uncertainty. (e) Spatiotemporal distribution of the CoDe-BPINN estimated uncertainty (σS). (f) Spatiotem-
poral distribution of the parameter-induced uncertainty from the FDM ensemble (σθ).
Assessment and Decomposition of Predictive Uncertainty
Our Bayesian framework allows quantifying and
decompose predictive uncertainty. Figure 4e depicts predictive uncertainty stemming from the CoDe-BPINN
(denoted as σS in the figure), which reflects the combined effect of two sources, respectively corresponding
to (i) surrogate uncertainty (arising from variability in the solver weights) and (ii) parametric uncertainty
(associated with the inferred physical parameters). In contrast, Figure 4f depicts the parametric uncer-
tainty σθ obtained upon propagating the same parameter distribution through the reference FDM solver.


16
Milad Panahi et al.
For consistency, the FDM ensemble is driven by samples drawn from the posterior qϕ(θ|λ) inferred by the
Parameter Inference Network (Ninv).
A key observation is the strong structural agreement between these two uncertainty fields. Both exhibit
localized amplification along the reactive front within the clay layer (Ω2), where the solution is most sensitive
to the (uncertain) sorption parameters (α, β). At the system outlet (Fig. 4d), the total uncertainty estimated
by the CoDe-BPINN (magenta band) consistently envelops the reference parametric uncertainty obtained
from the FDM ensemble (grey band). The slightly broader spread of the CoDe-BPINN reflects the additional
contribution of surrogate approximation uncertainty . The close correspondence between these uncertainty
estimates in the data-constrained (boundary) region provides strong evidence that the inferred parameter
distribution accurately captures the variability required to reproduce the observed system behavior, thereby
yielding a strong validation basis for the overall probabilistic inversion framework.
Generalization Across the Operational Design Space of Porosity. To further assess the generalization capability
of the framework, we perform the same analysis for a scenario corresponding to an intermediate clay fraction
(εΩ2 = 0.399). This latter scenario lies between previously observed configurations in the porosity dimension
of the operational design space. The ensuing results are depicted in Figure 5.
Our CoDe-BPINN is seen to exhibit strong agreement with the reference solution also in this case, with a
relative L2 error of 2.8% between its inferred mean field and the FDM ensemble mean. This accuracy is further
confirmed at the outlet (Fig. 5d), where the CoDe-BPINN mean breakthrough curve closely matches its FDM
counterpart (yielding Rel.L2
ˆ
C(x = 1, t) = 0.8%). The model correctly captures the shift in transport dynamics
associated with this reduced clay content. The ensuing reduced sorption capacity leads to earlier breakthrough,
this behavior being consistently reflected in both the spatiotemporal concentration fields and the breakthrough
curve at the outlet. The corresponding uncertainty fields (comparing CoDe-BPINN predictive uncertainty, σS,
and the parameter-driven uncertainty, σθ obtained from the FDM ensemble) again display strong agreement,
with uncertainty localized along the reactive front. This consistent performance across different regions of the
operational design space demonstrates both the robustness of the learned surrogate and the reliability of the
inferred parameter distributions.
4.4 Analysis of Learned Parameter Dependencies
Beyond accurate state estimation, a key objective of this work is to uncover the underlying physical depen-
dencies governing the reactive transport process. This is achieved by analyzing the outputs of the Multivariate
Parameter Network (Ninv), which provides a structured mapping between the physical parameters (θ) and
the operating conditions (λ). Through this analysis, it is possible to disentangle the coupled dependencies
between transport and sorption properties and the experimental controls. Figure 6 provides a detailed charac-
terization of the learned parameter manifold for the baseline experimental condition (High Clay, εΩ2 = 0.371;
Low Concentration, C0 = 100 mg/L).
Fig. 6: Multivariate analysis of the inferred physical parameters. (Left) The learned correlation matrix Rln θ
reveals a largely decoupled structure between dispersive (aLs, aLc) and sorption (α[L/mg], β[mg/g]) param-
eters, together with a pronounced negative correlation (ρ = −0.54) between sorption affinity α and capacity
β. (Middle) Evolution of the joint distribution in the ln α-ln β plane as Darcy flux q increases from 1.99 to
12.43 mm/min. Dashed ellipses denote the corresponding 95% confidence regions, illustrating the geometry
of the inferred parameter uncertainty. (Right) Learned functional relationship, β(q), showing a monotonic
reduction of effective sorption capacity with increasing flow rate, together with uncertainty bounds.


A Conditioned-on-Design Bayesian Physics Informed Neural Network (CoDe-BPINN)
17
Fig. 7: Extrapolation to an Unseen Operating Scenario. Multivariate analysis for a configuration characterized
by minimum clay content (εΩ2 = 0.424) and maximum inlet concentration (C0 = 300 mg/L). The model
yields physically consistent trends, indicating a marked reduction in the overall effective sorption strength
(αβ) driven by a decrease in both affinity and capacity. The progressive widening of the uncertainty bands at
higher flow rates reflects increased uncertainty, consistent with extrapolation beyond the training domain.
Table 2: Inferred effective parameters for the nine experimental cases. Values are reported as mean ± standard
deviation of the posterior distribution predicted by the Parameter Inference Network. The operational variables
are Darcy flux (q), inlet concentration (C0), and middle-layer porosity (εΩ2). The inferred parameters are sand
and clay dispersivities (aLs and aLc), sorption affinity (α), and sorption capacity (β).
Operational Parameters
Inferred Physical Parameters (Mean ± Std. Dev.)
Exp.
q
C0
εΩ2
aLs
aLc
α
β
ID
[mm/min]
[mg/L]
[-]
[mm]
[mm]
[L/mg]
[mg/g]
1
1.989
100
0.371
1.710 ± 0.180
3.488 ± 0.525
(2.380 ± 0.585) × 10−4
19.833 ± 4.529
2
4.974
100
0.371
2.847 ± 0.253
4.762 ± 0.629
(2.550 ± 0.636) × 10−4
15.311 ± 3.519
3
12.434
100
0.371
10.362 ± 0.599
12.752 ± 1.150
(1.830 ± 0.491) × 10−4
9.230 ± 2.105
4
1.989
150
0.371
1.725 ± 0.193
3.764 ± 0.605
(1.790 ± 0.456) × 10−4
18.035 ± 3.986
5
1.989
200
0.371
1.705 ± 0.209
4.024 ± 0.708
(1.440 ± 0.373) × 10−4
16.879 ± 3.746
6
1.989
250
0.371
1.671 ± 0.225
4.275 ± 0.808
(1.200 ± 0.327) × 10−4
16.040 ± 3.682
7
1.989
300
0.371
1.627 ± 0.240
4.535 ± 0.943
(1.020 ± 0.295) × 10−4
15.533 ± 3.658
8
1.989
100
0.424
0.997 ± 0.267
5.516 ± 1.451
(0.430 ± 0.132) × 10−4
12.346 ± 2.932
9
1.989
100
0.399
1.302 ± 0.225
4.351 ± 0.868
(0.980 ± 0.271) × 10−4
15.448 ± 3.464
Structure of Learned Parameter Correlations. The learned correlation matrix (Fig. 6, Left) provides quanti-
tative evidence that the CoDe-BPINN has effectively partitioned the governing physics. The matrix exhibits a
distinct block-diagonal structure, indicating that the model has identified two weakly coupled groups of param-
eters, i.e., dispersive (aLs, aLc) and reactive (α, β) parameters, each governing distinct aspects of the transport
dynamics. Within the sorption subspace, a pronounced negative correlation (ραβ = −0.86) emerges between
the Langmuir affinity α and capacity β. This result reflects the observation that for a given breakthrough
behavior, an increase in affinity must be offset by a decrease in capacity, and vice versa. The CoDe-BPINN
captures this trade-off through a negative off-diagonal structure in the learned Cholesky factor Lln θ. Con-
versely, the dispersive parameters exhibit only a weak positive correlation (ρaLsaLc = 0.24) between the sand
and clay dispersivities. This suggests that the data constrain the dispersivity in each layer separately, with
only weak interaction between them. The corresponding inferred mean values of the physical parameters (µθ)
across the nine experimental configurations are listed in Table 2.
Analysis of the Inferred Parameter Manifold. The joint evolution of the inferred mean parameters (Fig. 6,
Middle) reveals a non-trivial dynamic response to variations in hydrodynamic conditions. As Darcy flux q
increases (progressing from the blue to the green ellipse in Figure 6), the system transitions from a regime
characterized by higher sorption capacity (ln β ≈3.0) to one with reduced capacity (ln β ≈2.2). The behavior
of sorption affinity, α, is notably non-monotonic. At low to intermediate flow rates, α increases slightly,
suggesting enhanced mass transfer to the adsorbent surface, whereas reduced residence time becomes dominant
at higher flow rates, leading to a marked decrease in both effective affinity (α) and capacity (β). This resulting
hook-shaped trajectory indicates that the framework captures a non-linear trade-off between transport and
sorption processes, rather than a simple monotonic relationship. The orientation of the uncertainty ellipses
(that are aligned along the negative diagonal), reflects the strong anti-correlation between α and β. This


18
Milad Panahi et al.
pattern indicates that the model explores a direction of parameter equifinality, adjusting the balance between
affinity and capacity to preserve consistency with the observed transport dynamics as flow conditions vary.
Learned Functional Dependence Between Flow Rate and Sorption Capacity To isolate the relationship be-
tween flow conditions and sorption capacity, we examine the marginal distribution obtained considering the
results obtained in plane q - β (Fig. 6, Right), from which a functional dependence β(q) can be inferred.
The model identifies a clear monotonic decrease in effective sorption capacity with increasing Darcy flux, the
effective median value of β decreasing from ≈20 mg/g to ≈9 mg/g. This trend is consistent with a concep-
tual picture according to which reduced residence times at higher flow velocities tend to limit intra-particle
diffusion, thereby restricting access to adsorption sites within microporous structures and effectively lowering
the observable capacity. The associated uncertainty (red dotted curve in Figure 6) remains consistently low
and stable across the entire range of flow rates, suggesting that this relationship is robustly supported by the
data. It is also important to note that this behavior may partially reflect limitations of the adopted equilib-
rium sorption model, which does not explicitly account for kinetic or mass transfer effects. Incorporating such
processes could provide a more accurate representation of the system, particularly at higher flow rates.
Extrapolation to Untrained Regimes. To assess generalization limits of the inferred model, we consider a
scenario outside the training domani within the operational design space and corresponding to minimum clay
content in the intermediate layer (i.e., maximum porosity, εΩ2 = 0.424) and maximum inlet concentration
(C0 = 300 mg/L). This configuration represents a joint extrapolation in the operational design space, as the
model was not trained on data combining these conditions. The ensuing results are depicted in Figure 7.
Relative to the baseline case, the model projects a significant reduction in overall sorption strength, driven
by decreases in both effective affinity (α) and capacity (β). For instance, at a low flow rate (q ≈2 mm/min),
the inferred effective sorption coefficient (αβ) decreases from ≈0.0067 in the high-clay baseline configuration
to ≈0.00016 in the low-clay scenario, corresponding to a reduction exceeding 95%. While experimental data
are not available for direct validation in this specific regime, this trend is consistent from a physical standpoint,
as reduced adsorbent mass (associated with higher porosity) naturally lowers the total sorption capacity (β),
while altered flow conditions likely reduce contact efficiency, leading to a reduced effective affinity (α).
Furthermore, the model retains the monotonic decay of β with increasing flow rate. Importantly, the total
predictive uncertainty (as reflected through the 95% CI) expands noticeably at higher flow rates relative to the
training regime. This suggests that the CoDe-BPINN appropriately identifies this region as weakly constrained
by information. This behavior, which combines physically consistent extrapolations with increased uncertainty,
suggests that the framework remains robust and avoids overconfident predictions in unobserved regions of the
operational design spaces.
4.5 Learned Parameter Manifolds in the Operational Design Space
We recall that the primary objective of the inverse framework is to learn continuous functional mappings
between the operational design variables λ and the underlying physical parameters θ. To analyze these rela-
tionships, we evaluate the trained Parameter Network (Ninv) over a two-dimensional slice of the operational
design space defined by the middle layer porosity (εΩ2) and Darcy flux (q). This enables us to visualize the
inferred dependencies as continuous parameter manifolds. Figure 8 depicts these manifolds for the two key
physical quantities, i.e., the maximum sorption capacity (β) and the clay layer dispersivity (aLc), while holding
the inlet concentration fixed at a baseline value C0 = 100 mg/L.
The inferred manifold for sorption capacity, β(εΩ2, q) (Figure 8a), reveals two distinct and physically
consistent trends. Along the vertical axis (corresponding to porosity), β decreases as εΩ2 increases, reflecting
the reduction in clay content and, consequently, the decrease in available sorption sites. The value of β is
then seen to decrease as Darcy flux increases, indicating that shorter residence times at higher velocities limit
access to intra-particle pore space and reduce the effective sorption capacity.
The manifold for clay dispersivity, aLc(εΩ2, q) (Figure 8b), reveals a systematic increase with Darcy flux,
indicating that the inferred dispersivity behaves as an effective, flow-dependent parameter rather than a purely
geometric constant. While classical formulations assume a linear relationship between dispersion and velocity,
the observed trend suggests a nonlinear dependence, potentially reflecting unresolved transport mechanisms.
In particular, rate-limited mass transfer processes (such as, e.g., intra-particle diffusion or non-equilibrium
sorption) become more pronounced at higher flow rates and can markedly contribute to additional front
spreading. In the absence of explicit kinetic terms in the governing ADR model, these effects are implicitly
embedded into the inferred dispersivity values. Overall, these results suggest that the CoDe-BPINN framework
identifies physically meaningful effective parameterizations that reconcile the adopted governing equations with
the complex transport behavior observed in the experimental system.


A Conditioned-on-Design Bayesian Physics Informed Neural Network (CoDe-BPINN)
19
Fig. 8: Learned relationships between physical parameters. The 2D heatmaps visualize the mean of
the estimated physical parameters as a continuous function of the operational design space (εΩ2, q) at a fixed
C0 = 100 mg/L. a) The manifold for maximum sorption capacity, β(εΩ2, q). b) The manifold for clay layer
dispersivity, aLc(εΩ2, q).
4.6 Local Sensitivity Analysis via Automatic Differentiation
A distinct advantage of the CoDe-BPINN framework over conventional numerical solvers is its end-to-end
differentiability. In traditional settings, Global or Local Sensitivity Analyses (GSA/LSA) typically require
multiple forward simulations, leading to significant computational cost . In contrast, our trained surrogate
model can be treated as a differentiable operator, enabling direct evaluation of local sensitivity indices, Sλ =
∂ˆC/∂λ, through a single backward pass using Automatic Differentiation (AD). The ensuing sensitivity fields
(see Figure 9) provide detailed insight into the spatiotemporal regions where the system response is most
sensitive to variations in physical and operational parameters.
Fig. 9: Spatiotemporal Local Sensitivity Fields. The maps illustrate the gradient of the mean predicted
concentration, E[ ˆC(x; λ)], with respect to each of the normalized operational parameters λ = [εΩ2, q, C0]. The
analysis is performed at the baseline condition (εΩ2 = 0.371, q = 1.99 mm/min, C0 = 100 mg/L). A positive
sensitivity means that increasing the parameter increases concentration at that point, zero sensitivity indicates
regions where the parameter has no influence.
Considering the impact of operational parameters on the concentration field, the sensitivity analysis reveals
distinct and physically consistent patterns across the domain. We note that sensitivity tends to increase within
the column length dimension, reflecting the accumulated influence of parameters across the transport path.
Sensitivity with respect to Porosity (as expressed through ∂ˆC/∂εΩ2) is negligible within the inlet sand
layer (Ω1), while becoming pronounced as the solute enters the reactive clay layer (Ω2). It further intensifies
downstream in the outlet sand layer (Ω3). The predominantly positive gradient indicates that increasing
porosity leads to earlier breakthrough. This behavior is physically consistent, as higher porosity corresponds
to a reduced clay fraction and thus a lower density of sorption sites, diminishing the overall retardation
capacity.
Sensitivity with respect to Darcy Flux (as expressed through ∂ˆC/∂q)) exhibits the largest magnitude
among the considered parameters and closely follows the propagation of the concentration front. A strong


20
Milad Panahi et al.
positive signal ahead of the front indicates that increasing the flow rate accelerates solute transport, leading
to earlier arrival times.
Finally, although the magnitude of sensitivity with respect to Inlet Concentration (∂ˆC/∂C0)) is slightly
lower than that associated with porosity, it is seen to form a localized plume concentrated within the mass
transfer zone of the reactive layer. This pattern reflects the role of inlet concentration in modulating sorp-
tion. In this context, higher values of C0 accelerate saturation of available sorption sites and lead to earlier
breakthrough.
This capability to evaluate sensitivity fields on demand across the entire design space is a key advantage of
the proposed framework. It enables rapid assessment of the way variations in operational parameters propagate
through the system in space and time, thus providing actionable insights into system behavior. Such analyses
would be computationally prohibitive using traditional ensemble-based approaches, which require repeated
forward simulations.
5 Conclusions
This study introduced a comprehensive Bayesian computational framework (termed CoDe-BPINN) that re-
casts the inverse problem of reactive transport as a coupled, end-to-end differentiable learning task. By in-
tegrating a domain-decomposed PINN solver with a multivariate parameter inference network, the proposed
approach enables the reconstruction of contaminant transport dynamics in heterogeneous porous media from
sparse boundary observations. The framework provides a robust methodology for jointly learning an accurate
forward surrogate model and inferring the underlying constitutive relationships, even in data-limited settings.
Our work leads to the following major conclusions.
(i) The proposed solver architecture, trained with a curriculum-based and physics-informed loss weighting,
yields accurate reconstruction of the solution manifold across diverse experimental conditions. It captures
sharp gradients at material interfaces and reproduces key features of the observed experimental break-
through curves.
(ii) The framework identifies multi-dimensional dependencies between the governing physical parameters and
operational conditions. Notably, it reveals that the effective sorption capacity (β) decreases with increasing
flow rate and porosity, reflecting the combined influence of kinetic limitations and reduced adsorbent mass.
(iii) The multivariate parameter network captures the intrinsic structure of parameter interactions, including a
strong negative correlation between sorption affinity (α) and capacity (β), thereby providing a coeherent
quantification of parameter uncertainty across the multidimensional design space.
(iv) The framework yields predictive uncertainty in line with the uncertainty of the observations. Through
Monte Carlo analysis and comparison with a reference FDM solver, it is shown that uncertainty remains
low in data-constrained regions while being appropriately propagated into unobserved spatiotemporal
domains, supporting the reliability of the model for predictive applications.
Future developments may extend this methodology to higher-dimensional parameter spaces and enable
real-time data assimilation for adaptive process monitoring and control.
Declarations
Funding. The authors acknowledge financial support from the European Union’s Horizon 2020 research and
innovation programme under the Marie Sk lodowska-Curie grant agreement No 956384
Code availability. Codes used in this paper will be available in the following github repository https://
github.com/MiladPnh/Modulated-BPINNs.git
Author Contributions. All authors came up with the research idea, M.P. and G.P designed the computation
experiments, and M.P. implemented the code. G.P., A.G, and M.R. supervised the project. M.P. wrote the
first draft, all participated in reviewing the manuscript. Competing Interests. The authors have no competing
interests to declare that are relevant to the content of this article.


A Conditioned-on-Design Bayesian Physics Informed Neural Network (CoDe-BPINN)
21
References
H. Patel. Comparison of batch and fixed bed column adsorption: a critical review. International Journal of
Environmental Science and Technology, 19(10):10409–10426, 2022. doi: 10.1007/s13762-021-03492-y. URL
https://doi.org/10.1007/s13762-021-03492-y.
Y. Rubin.
Applied Stochastic Hydrogeology.
OUP E-Books. Oxford University Press, 2003.
ISBN
9780195138047. URL https://books.google.it/books?id=CqLmCwAAQBAJ.
J. Bear. Dynamics of Fluids in Porous Media. Dover Civil and Mechanical Engineering Series. Dover, 1988.
ISBN 9780486656755. URL https://books.google.it/books?id=lurrmlFGhTEC.
K. Y. Foo and B. H. Hameed. Insights into the modeling of adsorption isotherm systems. Chemical engineering
journal, 156(1):2–10, 2010. doi: 10.1016/j.cej.2009.09.013. URL https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cej.2009.
09.013.
G. Limousin, J. Gaudet, L. Charlet, S. Szenknect, V. Barth`es, and M. Krimissa. Sorption isotherms: A review
on physical bases, modeling and measurement. Applied Geochemistry, 22(2):249–275, 2007. ISSN 0883-2927.
doi: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.apgeochem.2006.09.010. URL https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/
article/pii/S0883292706002629.
E. Worch.
Fixed-bed adsorption in drinking water treatment: a critical review on models and parameter
estimation. Journal of Water Supply: Research and Technology-Aqua, 57(3):171–183, 05 2008. ISSN 0003-
7214. doi: 10.2166/aqua.2008.100. URL https://doi.org/10.2166/aqua.2008.100.
A. Tarantola. Inverse Problem Theory and Methods for Model Parameter Estimation. Society for Industrial
and Applied Mathematics, 2005. doi: 10.1137/1.9780898717921. URL https://epubs.siam.org/doi/abs/
10.1137/1.9780898717921.
K. Beven and J. Freer. Equifinality, data assimilation, and uncertainty estimation in mechanistic modelling of
complex environmental systems using the glue methodology. Journal of Hydrology, 249(1):11–29, 2001. ISSN
0022-1694. doi: https://doi.org/10.1016/S0022-1694(01)00421-8. URL https://www.sciencedirect.com/
science/article/pii/S0022169401004218.
J. Carrera, A. Alcolea, A. Medina, J. Hidalgo, and L. J. Slooten. Inverse problem in hydrogeology. Hydro-
geology journal, 13(1):206–222, 2005. doi: 10.1007/s10040-004-0404-7. URL https://doi.org/10.1007/
s10040-004-0404-7.
H. V. Gupta, K. J. Beven, and T. Wagener. Model Calibration and Uncertainty Estimation, chapter 131. John
Wiley & Sons, Ltd, 2006. ISBN 9780470848944. doi: https://doi.org/10.1002/0470848944.hsa138. URL
https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/abs/10.1002/0470848944.hsa138.
A. Dell’Oca, M. Riva, P. Ackerer, and A. Guadagnini. Solute transport in random composite media with
uncertain dispersivities. Advances in Water Resources, 128:48–58, June 2019. ISSN 0309-1708. doi: 10.
1016/j.advwatres.2019.04.005. URL http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.advwatres.2019.04.005.
D. M. Tartakovsky. Assessment and management of risk in subsurface hydrology: A review and perspective.
Advances in Water Resources, 51:247–260, January 2013. ISSN 0309-1708. doi: 10.1016/j.advwatres.2012.
04.007. URL http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.advwatres.2012.04.007.
C. Scheidt, L. Li, and J. Caers. Front Matter. American Geophysical Union (AGU), 2018. ISBN 9781119325888.
doi: https://doi.org/10.1002/9781119325888.fmatter. URL https://agupubs.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/
doi/abs/10.1002/9781119325888.fmatter.
W. Taylor, J. Herman, and V. Morales. Global sensitivity of laboratory-scale groundwater reactive transport
simulations for sorption and degradation: Breakthrough dynamics across p´eclet–damk¨ohler regimes. Journal
of Contaminant Hydrology, page 105043, 2026.
G. Ceriotti, A. Russian, D. Bolster, and G. Porta. A double-continuum transport model for segregated porous
media: Derivation and sensitivity analysis-driven calibration. Advances in Water Resources, 128:206–217,
2019.
A. Lavin, D. Krakauer, H. Zenil, J. Gottschlich, T. Mattson, J. Brehmer, A. Anandkumar, S. Choudry,
K. Rocki, A. G. Baydin, C. Prunkl, B. Paige, O. Isayev, E. Peterson, P. L. McMahon, J. Macke, K. Cranmer,
J. Zhang, H. Wainwright, A. Hanuka, M. Veloso, S. Assefa, S. Zheng, and A. Pfeffer. Simulation intelligence:
Towards a new generation of scientific methods, 2022. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2112.03235.
M. Raissi, P. Perdikaris, and G. Karniadakis. Physics-informed neural networks: A deep learning framework
for solving forward and inverse problems involving nonlinear partial differential equations.
Journal of
Computational Physics, 378:686–707, February 2019. ISSN 0021-9991. doi: 10.1016/j.jcp.2018.10.045. URL
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.jcp.2018.10.045.
M. Raissi, P. Perdikaris, N. Ahmadi, and G. E. Karniadakis. Physics-informed neural networks and extensions,
2024. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2408.16806.
K. Luo, J. Zhao, Y. Wang, J. Li, J. Wen, J. Liang, H. Soekmadji, and S. Liao.
Physics-informed neu-
ral networks for pde problems: a comprehensive review. Artificial Intelligence Review, 58(10):1–43, 2025.
doi: https://doi.org/10.1007/s10462-025-11322-7. URL https://link.springer.com/article/10.1007/
s10462-025-11322-7#citeas.


22
Milad Panahi et al.
I. Lagaris, A. Likas, and D. Fotiadis. Artificial neural networks for solving ordinary and partial differential
equations. IEEE Transactions on Neural Networks, 9(5):987–1000, 1998. ISSN 1045-9227. doi: 10.1109/72.
712178. URL http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/72.712178.
N. B. Kovachki, Z. Li, B. Liu, K. Azizzadenesheli, K. Bhattacharya, A. M. Stuart, and A. Anandkumar.
Neural operator: Learning maps between function spaces.
CoRR, abs/2108.08481, 2021.
URL https:
//arxiv.org/abs/2108.08481.
L. Lu, P. Jin, G. Pang, Z. Zhang, and G. E. Karniadakis.
Learning nonlinear operators via deeponet
based on the universal approximation theorem of operators. Nature Machine Intelligence, 3(3):218–229,
March 2021.
ISSN 2522-5839.
doi: 10.1038/s42256-021-00302-5.
URL http://dx.doi.org/10.1038/
s42256-021-00302-5.
Z. Li, N. Kovachki, K. Azizzadenesheli, B. Liu, K. Bhattacharya, A. Stuart, and A. Anandkumar. Fourier neural
operator for parametric partial differential equations, 2021. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2010.08895.
Y. Chen, L. Lu, G. E. Karniadakis, and L. Dal Negro. Physics-informed neural networks for inverse problems
in nano-optics and metamaterials. Optics express, 28(8):11618–11633, 2020.
M. Raissi. Open problems in applied deep learning, 2023. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2301.11316.
L. Yang, X. Meng, and G. E. Karniadakis. B-pinns: Bayesian physics-informed neural networks for forward
and inverse pde problems with noisy data. Journal of Computational Physics, 425:109913, 2021. ISSN 0021-
9991. doi: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jcp.2020.109913. URL https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/
article/pii/S0021999120306872.
X. Meng, H. Babaee, and G. E. Karniadakis. Multi-fidelity bayesian neural networks: Algorithms and applica-
tions. Journal of Computational Physics, 438:110361, 2021. ISSN 0021-9991. doi: https://doi.org/10.1016/
j.jcp.2021.110361. URL https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0021999121002564.
L. Sun and J. Wang. Physics-constrained bayesian neural network for fluid flow reconstruction with sparse
and noisy data. Theoretical and Applied Mechanics Letters, 10(3):161–169, 2020. ISSN 2095-0349. doi:
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.taml.2020.01.031.
URL https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/
pii/S2095034920300295.
A. F. Psaros, X. Meng, Z. Zou, L. Guo, and G. E. Karniadakis.
Uncertainty quantification in scientific
machine learning: Methods, metrics, and comparisons. Journal of Computational Physics, 477:111902, 2023.
ISSN 0021-9991. doi: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jcp.2022.111902. URL https://www.sciencedirect.com/
science/article/pii/S0021999122009652.
S. H. Lee and W. Chen. A comparative study of uncertainty propagation methods for black-box-type problems.
Structural and Multidisciplinary Optimization, 37(3):239–253, May 2008. ISSN 1615-1488. doi: 10.1007/
s00158-008-0234-7. URL http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/s00158-008-0234-7.
F. Z. Maina and A. Guadagnini.
Uncertainty quantification and global sensitivity analysis of subsurface
flow parameters to gravimetric variations during pumping tests in unconfined aquifers. Water Resources
Research, 54(1):501–518, January 2018. ISSN 1944-7973. doi: 10.1002/2017wr021655. URL http://dx.
doi.org/10.1002/2017wr021655.
N. Rahaman, A. Baratin, D. Arpit, F. Draxler, M. Lin, F. Hamprecht, Y. Bengio, and A. Courville. On the
spectral bias of neural networks. In Kamalika Chaudhuri and Ruslan Salakhutdinov, editors, Proceedings
of the 36th International Conference on Machine Learning, volume 97 of Proceedings of Machine Learn-
ing Research, pages 5301–5310. PMLR, 09–15 Jun 2019.
URL https://proceedings.mlr.press/v97/
rahaman19a.html.
S. Wang, X. Yu, and P. Perdikaris. When and why pinns fail to train: A neural tangent kernel perspective.
Journal of Computational Physics, 449:110768, January 2022. ISSN 0021-9991. doi: 10.1016/j.jcp.2021.
110768. URL http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.jcp.2021.110768.
R. Fletcher. The Theory of Constrained Optimization, chapter 9, pages 195–228. John Wiley & Sons, Ltd, 2000.
ISBN 9781118723203. doi: https://doi.org/10.1002/9781118723203.ch9. URL https://onlinelibrary.
wiley.com/doi/abs/10.1002/9781118723203.ch9.
S. Wang, Y. Teng, and P. Perdikaris. Understanding and mitigating gradient flow pathologies in physics-
informed neural networks.
SIAM Journal on Scientific Computing, 43(5):A3055–A3081, January 2021.
ISSN 1095-7197. doi: 10.1137/20m1318043. URL http://dx.doi.org/10.1137/20m1318043.
A. D. Jagtap, E. Kharazmi, and G. E. Karniadakis. Conservative physics-informed neural networks on discrete
domains for conservation laws: Applications to forward and inverse problems. Computer Methods in Applied
Mechanics and Engineering, 365:113028, 2020a. ISSN 0045-7825. doi: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cma.2020.
113028. URL https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0045782520302127.
M. Panahi, G. M. Porta, M. Riva, and A. Guadagnini. Modeling parametric uncertainty in pdes models via
physics-informed neural networks. Advances in Water Resources, 195:104870, 2025. ISSN 0309-1708. doi:
10.1016/j.advwatres.2024.104870. URL http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.advwatres.2024.104870.
P. Flores, O. Graf, P. Protopapas, and K. Pichara. Improved uncertainty quantification in physics-informed
neural networks using error bounds and solution bundles, 2025. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2505.06459.


A Conditioned-on-Design Bayesian Physics Informed Neural Network (CoDe-BPINN)
23
L. Sun, H. Gao, S. Pan, and J. Wang. Surrogate modeling for fluid flows based on physics-constrained deep
learning without simulation data. Computer Methods in Applied Mechanics and Engineering, 361:112732,
April 2020. ISSN 0045-7825. doi: 10.1016/j.cma.2019.112732. URL http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.cma.
2019.112732.
Y. Zhu, N. Zabaras, P. Koutsourelakis, and P. Perdikaris.
Physics-constrained deep learning for high-
dimensional surrogate modeling and uncertainty quantification without labeled data.
Journal of Com-
putational Physics, 394:56–81, October 2019.
ISSN 0021-9991.
doi: 10.1016/j.jcp.2019.05.024.
URL
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.jcp.2019.05.024.
W. Chen, Q. Wang, J. S. Hesthaven, and C. Zhang. Physics-informed machine learning for reduced-order
modeling of nonlinear problems. Journal of Computational Physics, 446:110666, December 2021. ISSN
0021-9991. doi: 10.1016/j.jcp.2021.110666. URL http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.jcp.2021.110666.
M. J. Asher, B. F. W. Croke, A. J. Jakeman, and L. J. M. Peeters. A review of surrogate models and their
application to groundwater modeling.
Water Resources Research, 51(8):5957–5973, August 2015.
ISSN
1944-7973. doi: 10.1002/2015wr016967. URL http://dx.doi.org/10.1002/2015wr016967.
M. Panahi, G. M. Porta, M. Riva, and A. Guadagnini. Physics informed differentiable solvers for learning
parametric solution manifolds in heterogeneous physical systems. PNAS Nexus, page pgag195, 06 2026.
ISSN 2752-6542. doi: 10.1093/pnasnexus/pgag195. URL https://doi.org/10.1093/pnasnexus/pgag195.
N. Thuerey, B. Holzschuh, P. Holl, G. Kohl, M. Lino, Q. Liu, P. Schnell, and F. Trost. Physics-based deep
learning, 2025. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2109.05237.
F. de Avila Belbute-Peres, K. Smith, K. Allen, J. Tenenbaum, and J. Z. Kolter.
End-to-end differen-
tiable physics for learning and control. In S. Bengio, H. Wallach, H. Larochelle, K. Grauman, N. Cesa-
Bianchi, and R. Garnett, editors, Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, volume 31. Cur-
ran Associates, Inc., 2018.
URL https://proceedings.neurips.cc/paper_files/paper/2018/file/
842424a1d0595b76ec4fa03c46e8d755-Paper.pdf.
M. Innes, A. Edelman, K. Fischer, C. Rackauckas, E. Saba, V. B. Shah, and W. Tebbutt. A differentiable
programming system to bridge machine learning and scientific computing, 2019. URL https://arxiv.org/
abs/1907.07587.
A. U. Khan, G. M. Porta, M. Riva, and A. Guadagnini. In-silico mechanistic analysis of adsorption of iodinated
contrast media agents on graphene surface.
Ecotoxicology and Environmental Safety, 280:116506, 2024.
ISSN 0147-6513. doi: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ecoenv.2024.116506. URL https://www.sciencedirect.
com/science/article/pii/S0147651324005827.
A. Sengar and A. Vijayanandan. Fate and removal of iodinated x-ray contrast media in membrane bioreactor:
Microbial dynamics and effects of different operational parameters. Science of The Total Environment,
869:161827, 2023.
ISSN 0048-9697.
doi: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.scitotenv.2023.161827.
URL https:
//www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0048969723004424.
J. L. Kormos, M. Schulz, and T. A. Ternes. Occurrence of iodinated x-ray contrast media and their biotrans-
formation products in the urban water cycle. Environmental Science & Technology, 45(20):8723–8732, 2011.
doi: 10.1021/es2018187. URL https://doi.org/10.1021/es2018187. PMID: 21877755.
S. E. Duirk, C. Lindell, C. C. Cornelison, J. Kormos, T. A. Ternes, M. Attene-Ramos, J. Osiol, E. D. Wagner,
M. J. Plewa, and S. D. Richardson. Formation of toxic iodinated disinfection by-products from compounds
used in medical imaging.
Environmental Science & Technology, 45(16):6845–6854, 2011.
doi: 10.1021/
es200983f. URL https://doi.org/10.1021/es200983f. PMID: 21761849.
A. U. Khan, M. Riva, G. Porta, E. Mauri, D. Moscatelli, and A. Guadagnini. Experimental and modeling
investigations for high-efficiency removal of polar iodinated contrast media from water through engineered
clays. Chemical Engineering Journal Advances, page 101351, 2026. doi: 10.1016/j.ceja.2026.101351.
A. Dell’Oca. Sensitivity analysis: An operational picture. Water Resources Research, 59(6):e2022WR033780,
2023. doi: https://doi.org/10.1029/2022WR033780. URL https://agupubs.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/
doi/abs/10.1029/2022WR033780. e2022WR033780 2022WR033780.
D. Ha, A. Dai, and Q. V. Le. Hypernetworks, 2016. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/1609.09106.
Y. Chen, B. Dong, and J. Xu.
Meta-mgnet: Meta multigrid networks for solving parameterized par-
tial differential equations.
Journal of Computational Physics, 455:110996, 2022.
ISSN 0021-9991.
doi:
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jcp.2022.110996.
URL https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/
pii/S0021999122000584.
A. Nichol, J. Achiam, and J. Schulman. On first-order meta-learning algorithms, 2018. URL https://arxiv.
org/abs/1803.02999.
D. Zhang, L. Lu, L. Guo, and G. E. Karniadakis. Quantifying total uncertainty in physics-informed neural
networks for solving forward and inverse stochastic problems. Journal of Computational Physics, 397:108850,
November 2019. ISSN 0021-9991. doi: 10.1016/j.jcp.2019.07.048. URL http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.
jcp.2019.07.048.
A. D. Jagtap, E. Kharazmi, and G. E. Karniadakis. Conservative physics-informed neural networks on discrete
domains for conservation laws: Applications to forward and inverse problems. Computer Methods in Applied


24
Milad Panahi et al.
Mechanics and Engineering, 365:113028, 2020b. ISSN 0045-7825. doi: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cma.2020.
113028. URL https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0045782520302127.
C. W. Fetter, T. B. Boving, and D. K. Kreamer. Contaminant hydrogeology, volume 1138. Prentice hall Upper
Saddle River, NJ, 1999.
D. P. Kingma and M. Welling. Auto-encoding variational bayes, 2022. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/1312.
6114.
M. Tancik, P. Srinivasan, B. Mildenhall, S. Fridovich-Keil, N. Raghavan, U. Singhal, R. Ramamoorthi, J. Bar-
ron, and R. Ng. Fourier features let networks learn high frequency functions in low dimensional domains.
Advances in neural information processing systems, 33:7537–7547, 2020. URL https://papers.neurips.
cc/paper_files/paper/2020/file/55053683268957697aa39fba6f231c68-Paper.pdf.
S. J. Anagnostopoulos, J. D. Toscano, N. Stergiopulos, and G. E. Karniadakis.
Learning in pinns:
Phase transition, diffusion equilibrium, and generalization.
Neural Networks, 193:107983, 2026.
ISSN
0893-6080. doi: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neunet.2025.107983. URL https://www.sciencedirect.com/
science/article/pii/S0893608025008640.
A.
Krishnapriyan,
A.
Gholami,
S.
Zhe,
R.
Kirby,
and
M.
W.
Mahoney.
Characterizing
pos-
sible failure modes in physics-informed neural networks.
Advances in neural information pro-
cessing systems, 34:26548–26560, 2021.
URL https://proceedings.neurips.cc/paper/2021/file/
df438e5206f31600e6ae4af72f2725f1-Paper.pdf.
M. Penwarden, S. Zhe, A. Narayan, and R. M. Kirby. A metalearning approach for physics-informed neural
networks (pinns): Application to parameterized pdes. Journal of Computational Physics, 477:111912, March
2023. ISSN 0021-9991. doi: 10.1016/j.jcp.2023.111912. URL http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.jcp.2023.
111912.
W. E. Schiesser. The numerical method of lines: integration of partial differential equations. Elsevier, 2012.
E. Hairer and G. Wanner. Solving Ordinary Differential Equations II: Stiff and Differential-Algebraic Problems,
volume 14 of Springer Series in Computational Mathematics.
Springer, 2 edition, 1996.
doi: 10.1007/
978-3-642-05221-7.
A. G. Baydin, B. A. Pearlmutter, A. A. Radul, and J. M. Siskind. Automatic differentiation in machine
learning: a survey. Journal of machine learning research, 18(153):1–43, 2018. URL http://jmlr.org/
papers/v18/17-468.html.


A Conditioned-on-Design Bayesian Physics Informed Neural Network (CoDe-BPINN)
25
Supporting information
Abstract This supplementary information file is divided into two sections:
1. Description of the reference numerical solver, employed to verify our CoDe-BPINN results.
2. Discussion of hyperparameters and training strategy technical details.
A Reference Numerical Framework: Method-of-Lines Finite Difference Solver
To rigorously validate the results (S) stemming from our approach, we rely on a high-fidelity reference solver based on the
Method of Lines (MOL) [Schiesser, 2012]. This approach discretizes the governing equation (Equation 4) in space while
retaining the continuous time dynamics, thereby transforming the problem into a system of coupled Ordinary Differential
Equations (ODEs).
Spatial Discretization. The spatial domain Ω= [0, L] is discretized using a uniform grid of Nx nodes with spacing
∆x = L/(Nx −1). The state vector C(t) ∈RNx represents the concentration at each grid point. To account for the
advection-dominated transport regime, the advective flux is approximated through a first-order upwind scheme, which
ensures numerical stability (monotonicity), albeit at the expense of introducing a mild numerical diffusion. The dispersive
flux is discretized through a second-order central difference scheme. Heterogeneous material properties (namely porosity εi,
dispersivity aL,i, and retardation factor Ri) are assigned on node-wise basis according to the column stratification, sharp
discontinuities being explicitly preserved at layer interfaces (x = 21 mm and x = 71 mm).
Boundary Conditions. The Dirichlet inlet condition is imposed directly as a state constraint, i.e., C0(t) = 1. For the
Neumann outlet condition (∂C/∂x|x=L = 0), we employ a ghost node formulation to retain second-order accuracy. A
fictitious node CN+1 is introduced outside the domain and defined such that CN+1 = CN−1. This leads to the following
approximation for the second derivative associated with the dispersive term at the outlet node N:
∂2C
∂x2

N
≈2CN−1 −2CN
∆x2
(S1)
This formulation enforces zero dispersive flux at the boundary while allowing advective outflow.
Non-Linear Reaction and Time Integration. The non-linear Langmuir sorption introduces a concentration-dependent
Retardation Factor RL(C). To address the ensuing stiffness of the system while preserving mass conservation, we employ an
implicit time integration scheme. The system of ODEs, dC
dt = F(t, C), is integrated using the Radau IIA method [Hairer and
Wanner, 1996] (an implicit Runge-Kutta scheme of order 5), which is well suited to capturing the sharp transients associated
with the propagation front. The Jacobian of the system is approximated via finite differences to facilitate Newton-Raphson
convergence at each time step.
Uncertainty Propagation. In contrast to the Solver S within our CoDe-BPINN framework, which provides probabilistic
results, the FDM solver operates on fixed parameter realizations and does not intrinsically quantify uncertainty. To obtain
reference uncertainty estimates for comparison, we perform a Monte Carlo ensemble analysis. We draw NMC samples of
the physical parameter vector θ from the posterior distribution learned by the Parameter Network, q(θ|λ), and execute the
FDM solver for each of these realizations. The resulting ensemble statistics (namely, mean and standard deviation) serve
as reference quantities (i.e., ground truth) to assess epistemic uncertainty estimates captured by the CoDe-BPINN.
A.1 Numerical Verification of the Reference Solver
To ensure reliability of the reference solution used for validation, the Method-of-Lines FDM solver was subject to a grid
convergence analysis. The spatial domain was discretized using Nx = 200 nodes (corresponding to a spatial resolution
∆x = 0.46 mm), and time integration was performed using an adaptive Runge-Kutta method (Radau IIA) with absolute
and relative tolerances of 10−6. Refining the spatial discretization to Nx = 500 resulted in a relative change in the
breakthrough curve below 0.1%, suggesting that the numerical solution is effectively mesh-independent and sufficiently
accurate to be employed as benchmark for validation of the CoDe-BPINN results.
A.2 Computational Efficiency and Inference cost
A primary motivation for developing the CoDe-BPINN digital twin is to replace computationally expensive iterative solvers
with near-instantaneous neural inference. The training phase, entailing joint optimization of the solver S and Parameter
Inference Network Ninv over 150,000 epochs, required approximately 2 hours on a single NVIDIA RTX4090 GPU. While
this upfront cost exceeds that of a single forward simulation using a Finite Difference Method (FDM) solver (≈5 seconds),
the advantage becomes evident at inference. Once trained, the CoDe-BPINN acts as a fully parameterized surrogate model.
It can generate a complete spatiotemporal solution field for a new set of operational design parameters in O(10−3) seconds,
corresponding to a speed-up of approximately three orders of magnitude relative to the numerical solver. Furthermore,
the CoDe-BPINN provides access to the full Jacobian of the solution with respect to input parameters via Automatic
Differentiation (AD) [Baydin et al., 2018]. This enables real-time sensitivity analysis and uncertainty propagation, a task
that would otherwise require large ensembles of Monte Carlo simulations in a conventional FDM framework.


26
Milad Panahi et al.
Table S1: Hyperparameter configuration for CoDe-BPINN.
Parameter
Value
Architecture (Solver S)
Number of sub-networks
3 (N Ω1, N Ω2, N Ω3)
Input dimension
dλ + d = 3 + 2
Number of Bayesian Dense Layers
2
Neurons per hidden layer
100
Activation function
SiLU (hidden), Sigmoid (output)
Architecture (Parameter Network Ninv)
Input dimension
dλ = 3
Hidden dimension
6
Output dimension
14 (dθ = 4 Means + 10 Cholesky elements)
Activation function
Tanh (hidden), Linear (output)
Input Embedding
Input embedding type
Random Fourier Features
Fourier feature scale
1.0
Embedding dimension
16
Optimizer
Optimizer type
AdamW
Weight decay
10−4
Initial learning rate
10−3
Learning Rate Schedule
Warmup steps
1,000
Decay schedule
Cosine annealing schedule
Total Epochs
150,000
Curriculum & Loss Weighting
Stage 1 (Geometric Init)
2,000 epochs
Stage 2 (Data Anchoring)
6,000 epochs
Stage 3 (Physics Discovery)
142,000 epochs
KL Annealing Start
Epoch 15,000
KL Weight Range
[10−5, 10−2]
Loss Weights (wdata, wpde)
(200.0, 5 × 103)
Loss Weights (wbc, wic, wint)
(8 × 104, 8 × 104, 8 × 104)
Collocation Sampling
Batch size (PDE)
214
Batch size (Data)
211
Batch size (BCs/IC)
214
Interface Points (Nint)
29
Sampling Method
Sobol Sequences (Scrambled)
B Hyperparameter Configurations
Table S1 lists the key elements of the network architecture, optimizer settings, and training hyperparameters used in this
study.
Priors and Initialization. For the solver weights ψ, we employ a standard isotropic Gaussian prior N(0, 1), which
regularizes the magnitude of the weights and promotes smooth solutions. The informative priors assigned to the physical
parameters θ (including first two moments associated with the Log-Normal distributions governing dispersivity, affinity,
and capacity) are defined in detail in Section 3.5.3 and are implemented accordingly.
Training strategy. To enhance training stability and address stiffness of the loss landscape, we employ two complementary
annealing scheduling strategies. The learning rate of the AdamW optimizer is managed by a cosine annealing schedule with
an initial linear warmup phase. The learning rate increases from zero to a maximum of 10−3 over the first 1,000 epochs,
facilitating robust exploration and mitigating poor initial convergence, and then smoothly decays towards a minimum
value of 10−5 over the remainder of training to promote fine-tuning. Concurrently, the weight of the KL divergence term
in Equation 13, wkl, is progressively increased during training. It is initially set to a small value (10−5) for the first 15,000
epochs, allowing the solver to flexibly fit observational data and boundary conditions. It is then linearly increased to a
final value of 10−2, gradually strengthening the influence of the prior. This scheduling strategy promotes a transition
from data-driven fitting to regularized inference, reducing epistemic uncertainty in the Bayesian solver S and forcing the


A Conditioned-on-Design Bayesian Physics Informed Neural Network (CoDe-BPINN)
27
Parameter Inference Network to account for the governing physical residuals, thereby preventing the solver from learning
unphysical solution behavior.
