Title: FlowScout: From Execution Feedback to Reliable Tool-Using Agent Workflows

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2608.10039v1

Published Time: Wed, 12 Aug 2026 00:04:41 GMT

Number of Pages: 12

Markdown Content:
# FLOW SCOUT : From Execution Feedback to Reliable Tool-Using Agent Workflows 

Shuo Hao ∗, You Lu ∗, Bihuan Chen ∗, Xin Peng ∗∗College of Computer Science and Artificial Intelligence, Fudan University, China 

Abstract —Agentic workflows have become an important abstrac-tion for building reliable LLM-based automation systems by orga-nizing large language models (LLMs), tools, and control logic into explicit execution structures. However, constructing high-quality agentic workflows remains largely manual and requires substantial domain expertise. Recent studies have explored automatic agentic workflow generation from historical task-solving records, but they mainly produce LLM-centric workflows, where real tool executions are abstracted and simulated by LLM nodes, limiting the usability and stability of generated workflows. To address these limitations, we propose F LOW SCOUT , an execution-guided framework for generating tool-integrated agentic workflows from historical task-solving records. Specifically, F LOW SCOUT represents an agentic workflow as a directed graph composed of LLM nodes, tool-calling nodes, and dependency edges. It first mines a common tool coordination skeleton from historical records to construct an initial workflow, and then refines the workflow topology through Monte Carlo tree search guided by execution feedback. We evaluate FLOW SCOUT on four representative task domains, and compare it with three baselines, i.e., PM4Py, ReAct and AFlow. Experimental results show that agentic workflows generated by F LOW SCOUT 

improve the tool invocation correctness by at least 92.69% and the execution score by at least 17.66% over the baselines, while achieving lower performance variation across repeated runs. 

I. I NTRODUCTION 

The rapid development of large language models (LLMs) [9, 24] has introduced LLM agents as a new automation paradigm for complex tasks. By combining LLM reasoning with external tools, LLM agents can interpret user queries, decompose tasks, invoke tools, and adapt subsequent actions according to intermediate results [3, 13, 14, 28, 30, 32, 37, 41, 42, 46]. However, the flexibility and the black-box nature of LLM reasoning make agent executions less stable and harder to inspect. For similar user queries, LLM agents may make inconsistent decisions, follow different action orders, and select different tools, leading to unpredictable execution results [1]. To improve the usability and stability of agent executions, agentic workflows provide a promising way to combine the strengths of traditional workflows and LLMs [43]. Instead of allowing an LLM agent to freely decide every action at runtime, an agentic workflow organizes LLMs, tools, and control logic into an explicit execution structure [19]. Such agentic work-flows preserve the semantic reasoning capability of LLMs, while constraining their execution with reusable and observable structures. Therefore, agentic workflows have become an increasingly important abstraction for building reliable LLM-based automation systems [10, 27, 34, 45, 48]. Prior studies have explored workflow generation, including synthesizing web-service workflows from formal service spec-ifications [2, 33], extracting process models from execution logs [7, 35], and generating software workflows from natural language descriptions [23, 39]. These studies provide important foundations for deriving workflows from specifications or ob-served task executions. However, they are mainly designed for settings where task activities have explicit semantics, stable execution patterns, and well-defined interfaces. As a result, they are difficult to directly apply to open-ended tasks that require semantic understanding, dynamic decision-making, and flexible coordination among external tools. Currently, the construction of high-quality agentic workflows remains largely manual. Ex-isting agent frameworks, e.g., LangChain [15], LangGraph [16], and AutoGen [36], and low-code platforms, e.g., Dify [17] and Coze [6], provide useful abstractions for implementing agentic workflows, but developers still need to decide how the agentic workflow should be built for a target task domain, requiring substantial domain expertise and iterative debugging effort. Recently, a few studies [44, 47] have started to explore the au-tomatic generation of agentic workflows. These approaches employ historical task-solving records, e.g., tool orchestration logs collected from human demonstrations, or LLM agent traces where tool invocation orders have been validated by successful task completion, to generate domain-specific agentic workflows. However, they can only generate LLM-centric workflows, where nodes are all LLM operations such as planning, pro-gramming, formatting, revision, and context generation, failing to explicitly preserve the real tool invocations embedded in historical task-solving records. Thus, the generated agentic workflows still rely heavily on LLMs to simulate tool execution, which may lead to unstable behaviors, hallucinated outputs, and limited interpretability of domain-specific tool coordination. To address these limitations, we propose F LOW SCOUT , an execution-guided framework for automatically generating tool-integrated agentic workflows from historical task-solving records. Specifically, we model an agentic workflow as a directed graph composed of LLM nodes, tool-calling nodes, and dependency edges that encode data flow and control flow, and formulate its generation as a search problem over candidate workflow graphs. Given available tools and a set of historical task-solving records consisting of domain-specific user queries, reference execution results, and validated tool orchestration logs, F LOW SCOUT first mines the most common tool coordination skeleton from historical records, and con-structs an initial agentic workflow by augmenting the skeleton with necessary LLM nodes. Then, F LOW SCOUT performs execution-guided graph search, where candidate workflows arXiv:2608.10039v1 [cs.LG] 10 Aug 2026 are executed on historical user queries and their outputs are compared against reference results. The feedback guides Monte Carlo tree search [4] to refine the workflow graph by adding, removing or refining LLM and tool-calling nodes, as well as modifying dependency edges. Finally, F LOW SCOUT produces a reusable and stable agentic workflow that explicitly coordinates real tools for solving new user queries in the target domain. We have conducted extensive experiments to evaluate the effectiveness and efficiency of F LOW SCOUT . First, we evaluate FLOW SCOUT on four representative task domains in Tool-Bench [28], i.e., finance, sports, travel, and weather, and com-pare it with three baselines, i.e., PM4Py [35], ReAct [42], and AFlow [44]. The results show that agentic workflows generated by F LOW SCOUT improve the tool invocation correctness by at least 92.69% and the execution score by at least 17.66% over the baselines, while reducing the coefficient of variation across repeated runs by 62.09% and 27.90% compared with Re-Act and AFlow, respectively. Second, the workflows generated by F LOW SCOUT incur at least 24.12% higher runtime cost than ReAct and AFlow for improved effectiveness. Besides, ablation studies show the contribution of our workflow miner and Monte Carlo tree search in F LOW SCOUT . Finally, we demonstrate the generalization capability of agentic workflows generated by F LOW SCOUT by deploying them at runtime with tools and LLMs different from those used during workflow generation. The main contributions of this work are as follows:  

> •

We represent an agentic workflow as a structured graph consisting of LLM nodes, tool-calling nodes, and edges that encode data dependency or control dependency, and cast the generation of agentic workflows as a graph search problem.  

> •

We propose F LOW SCOUT , an execution-guided generation framework, that automatically searches for tool-integrated agentic workflows based on historical task-solving records, improving the usability and stability of generated workflows.  

> •

We implement a prototype of F LOW SCOUT , and conduct experiments to demonstrate its effectiveness and efficiency. II. P ROBLEM FORMULATION 

Given available tools and historical task-solving records, in-cluding user queries, reference execution results, and validated tool orchestration logs, we aim to automatically generate tool-integrated agentic workflows for autonomous task completion. We first define such workflows and then formulate their gener-ation as a search problem over valid workflow graphs. 

A. Workflow Definition 

Given a task domain with a set of available tools T , we define a tool-integrated agentic workflow as a directed graph. 

Definition 1 (Tool-Integrated Agentic Workflow) . A tool-integrated agentic workflow is a directed graph G = ( V, E),where V is a set of workflow nodes consisting of LLM nodes and tool-calling nodes, and E is a set of directed dependency edges that define the control flow and data flow among nodes. 

Definition 2 (LLM Node) . An LLM node vl ∈ V , which performs semantic reasoning on textual context, is a tuple 

vl = ⟨δvl , ρ vl ⟩, where δvl is an LLM and ρvl is its prompt. 

Definition 3 (Tool-Calling Node) . A tool-calling node vt ∈ V ,which invokes real tools, is a tuple ⟨t, ϑ t⟩, where t ∈ T is the tool and ϑt is the arguments for tool invocation. 

Definition 4 (Dependency Edge) . An edge e⟨vi,v j ⟩ ∈ E is a tuple ⟨vi, v j , μ ⟩, denoting a directed dependency from node vi

to node vj , where μ specifies the dependency semantics, i.e., 

data dependency or control dependency. Workflow execution starts from an LLM node for user query parsing, and proceeds along dependency edges in the graph until a final response is produced by another LLM node for response synthesis. During execution, LLM nodes reason over available context and intermediate results, whereas tool-calling nodes provide external capabilities through real tool invocations. 

B. Workflow Generation as Graph Search 

The input consists of a set of available tools T and a col-lection of historical task-solving records D = {(qi, r i, π i)}Ni=1 ,where N is the number of records, qi is a user query, ri is the reference execution result, and πi is the validated tool orchestra-tion log. These records support both the automatic construction and evaluation of tool-integrated agentic workflows. Based on the definition in Sec. II-A, we define the search space of candidate workflows over available tools T by Eq. 1,           

> Ω( T) = {G = ( V,E)|Valid( G,T) = True }(1)

where Valid( G, T ) is a validity predicate indicating whether a candidate workflow G satisfies the basic constraints of a tool-integrated workflow. Specifically, G is valid only if its tool-calling nodes can invoke real tools in T , its dependency edges form an executable graph, and it contains at least one complete execution path from the input query to the final response. To estimate the quality of a candidate workflow G ∈ Ω( T ),we execute G on each historical query qi in D, producing a tool orchestration trace ˆπi and an execution result ˆri. Since complex tool-use tasks require both correct tool selection and execution scheduling [38], we evaluate candidate workflows at both the tool-invocation level and the final-result level. Specifically, we compare ˆπi with the validated orchestration log πi to evaluate 

tool invocation correctness , and compare ˆri with the reference execution result ri to obtain execution score .

Tool Invocation Correctness (TC) measures whether the agen-tic workflow invokes the correct tools with correct arguments while avoiding redundant invocations. Given a historical query 

qi, let its validated tool orchestration log be πi = {(tki , θ ki )}Ki

> k=1

,where Ki is the number of tool invocations, and tki and θki

denote the tool name and arguments of the k-th reference invocation. Similarly, let the tool orchestration trace produced by a candidate workflow G be ˆπi = {(ˆ tki , ˆθki )} ˆKi

> k=1

, where ˆKi

is the number of tool invocations, and ˆtki and ˆθki denote the tool name and arguments of the k-th invocation. We define the tool-invocation correctness of G on query qi by Eq. 2, 

T C i(G) = |LCS t=ˆ t∧θ= ˆθ (πi, ˆπi)|

max( Ki, ˆKi) (2) 

where LCS t=ˆ t∧θ=ˆθ (πi, ˆπi) denotes the longest common sub-sequence between the reference tool invocations and the workflow-produced tool invocations, where matched invoca-tions must have identical tool names and arguments. The numerator counts the number of correctly matched tool invocations. Compared with normalizing by Ki, the denomi-nator max( Ki, ˆKi) penalizes both missing and redundant tool invocations. The overall tool invocation correctness of G on historical records D is then defined by Eq. 3, 

T C (G) = 1

N

> N

X

> i=1

TC i(G) (3) 

where N is the number of historical user queries in D.

Execution Score (ES) measures whether the final execution result produced by the agentic workflow satisfies the user query and matches the reference execution result. Since the execution result may be expressed as natural language, structured results, or task-completion outcomes, rule-based evaluation is often insufficient. Therefore, we adopt an LLM-as-a-judge evaluator, 

i.e., G-eval [21], to assess the final execution result. Given a historical query qi with reference execution result ri

and the final execution result ˆri produced by candidate workflow G, the evaluator scores ˆri against ri from dimen-sions X = {correctness , completeness , relevance , clarity }. Let 

sxi ∈ [0 , 1] denote the score of ˆri on dimension x ∈ X . We define the execution score of G on historical records D by Eq. 4, 

ES (G) = 1

N

> N

X

> i=1

1

|X | 

X

> x∈X

sxi (4) 

where N is the number of historical user queries in D.The objective of tool-integrated agentic workflow generation is to identify a valid workflow graph that achieves high tool invocation correctness and execution score on historical task-solving records. Given the search space Ω( T ), we define the op-timal tool-integrated agentic workflow G∗ on tools T by Eq. 5. 

G∗ = arg max   

> G∈ Ω( T)

(T C (G) + ES (G)) (5) This formulation casts workflow generation as a graph search problem over the constrained workflow space Ω( T ).III. M ETHODOLOGY 

As formulated in Sec. II-B, tool-integrated agentic workflow generation can be viewed as a graph search problem over the constrained workflow space. However, directly searching this space is inefficient because many graph edits may lead to invalid or ineffective workflows. Therefore, F LOW SCOUT combines skeleton mining with execution-guided graph search to generate stable and reusable tool-integrated agentic workflows. Fig. 1 shows the overview of F LOW SCOUT , which consists of three modules, i.e., Workflow Miner , Workflow Executor ,Workflow Miner                

> Historical Task-Solving Records Available Tool Set
> &
> Coordination Skeleton Mining Task-Solving Record Splitting
> Optimization Set Mined Skeleton
> Agentic Workflow Initialization
> Workflow Optimizer
> Expansion Simulation
> 1Backpropagation Selection
> 3Workflow Executor
> 2
> Root
> 0.72 0.76 0.78 0.69 0.75 0.74 0.49 0.75 0.82 0.54 0.72 0.70 0.72 0.79 0.76 +∞
> Monte Carlo Tree Search
> Optimization/Validation Set Initial Tool-Integrated Agentic Workflow
> Tool-Integrated Agentic Workflow
> Agentic Workflow Execution Feedback
> Workflow Compilation
> Validation Set Optimization Set Executable Workflow
> Optimization Feedback Validation Feedback
> Workflow Execution

Fig. 1: Approach Overview of F LOW SCOUT 

and Workflow Optimizer . Given historical task-solving records and available tools, F LOW SCOUT first splits the records into optimization and validation sets, mines the frequent tool coordination skeleton from validated orchestration logs in the optimization set, and constructs an initial tool-integrated candidate workflow by augmenting the mined skeleton with necessary LLM nodes (see Sec. III-A). Then, F LOW SCOUT 

compiles the candidate workflow into an executable form, and runs it on the optimization set and validation set to collect optimization feedback and validation feedback (see Sec. III-B). Based on this execution feedback, F LOW SCOUT 

performs Monte Carlo tree search to refine the topology of the agentic workflow through selection, expansion, simulation, and backpropagation (see Sec. III-C). After iterative optimization, FLOW SCOUT outputs the candidate workflow with the best validation results as the final tool-integrated agentic workflow. 

A. Workflow Miner 

Directly searching for agentic workflows from an empty graph is inefficient, because most random graph edits either produce invalid workflows or fail to capture the common tool invocation structure in the target domain. Therefore, FLOW SCOUT first splits historical task-solving records, mines the tool coordination skeleton, and initializes a workflow G0,providing a structured warm start for subsequent optimization. 

Task-Solving Record Splitting. Given the historical task-solving records D = {(qi, r i, π i)}Ni=1 , F LOW SCOUT splits them into an optimization set Dopt and a validation set Dval .

Dopt is used to mine the tool coordination skeleton and provide optimization feedback for workflow generation, while Dval is reserved for selecting the best candidate workflow. 

Coordination Skeleton Mining. After obtaining the opti-mization set Dopt , we mine a process model from validated orchestration logs to obtain a reusable tool coordination skele-ton that can serve as the template for initializing the agentic workflow. For each validated orchestration log πi = ( tki , θ ki )Ki

> k=1

from historical task-solving records in Dopt , we derive the or-Initial Agentic Workflow   

> Planning
> Tool -Calling 1
> Tool -Calling 2
> Tool -Calling 3
> Tool -Calling 4
> Synthesizing
> Validated Orchestration Logs
> 𝜋 1：𝐴 → 𝐵 → 𝐶
> 𝜋 2：𝐴 → 𝐷 → 𝐵 → 𝐶
> 𝜋 3：𝐴 → 𝐷 → 𝐵 → 𝐶
> 𝜋 4：𝐴 → 𝐵 → 𝐶
> … …
> Constructed Event Log
> Case 1: A , B , C
> Case 2: A , D , B , C
> Case 3: A , D , B , C
> Case 4: A , B , C
> … …
> AX
> D
> BC
> Yes
> No
> ꚍ
> Mined Process Model
> Tool Coordination Skeleton
> Tool
> Tool
> Tool
> Tool
> Condition

Fig. 2: Example of Initial Agentic Workflow Mining dered tool sequence τi = ( t1 

> i

, t 2 

> i

, . . . , t Ki 

> i

), which preserves tool dependencies such as execution order and repeated invocations. Based on the ordered tool sequences, we construct an event log for process mining. In the event log, τi is treated as a case, and each tool invocation tki in τi is treated as one activity in the corresponding case. Then, we apply PM4Py [35] to discover the most common process model from the constructed event log. The mined model summarizes how tools are commonly co-ordinated in most historical executions, i.e., sequential relations, alternative paths, parallel relations, and repeated invocations. Then, we convert the discovered process model into a reusable tool coordination skeleton. Each activity in the mined model is mapped to a generic tool-calling position, rather than being bound to a concrete tool. This abstraction indicates that a tool invocation should be performed at this position, while leaving the concrete tool selection and argument generation to the later workflow execution. Each process relation is mapped to a workflow dependency. Specifically, sequential relations are converted into ordered dependencies between tool-calling posi-tions, alternative paths are converted into conditional branches, parallel relations are converted into parallel workflow branches, and repeated invocations are converted into retry loops. 

Agentic Workflow Initialization. The resulting coordination skeleton captures the common tool-invocation structure in historical executions, but it only describes the abstract positions of tool invocations and their coordination relations. To make the skeleton executable for new user queries, we further instantiate it as an initial tool-integrated agentic workflow. Specifically, each generic tool-calling position in the skeleton is instantiated as a tool-calling node, which will select a concrete tool from the available tool set and generate arguments during execution. We further insert an LLM node for planning before the tool-calling structure to parse the user query, and an LLM node after the tool-calling structure for synthesizing the final response to the user. Fig. 2 shows an example of the workflow mining process. 

B. Workflow Executor 

The workflow executor turns a candidate tool-integrated agentic workflow into an executable program, and collects execution results. Since candidate workflows produced by miner or optimizer may be incomplete or ineffective, F LOW SCOUT 

executes them under an observable runtime, and uses the observed feedback to guide subsequent workflow optimization. 

Workflow Compilation. Given a candidate workflow G′ =(V′, E′), F LOW SCOUT compiles it into an executable Python script ˆG′. Specifically, F LOW SCOUT traverses the workflow graph, and generates the corresponding Python code for nodes 

V′ and edges E′. Each LLM node vl ∈ V ′ is assigned a function that calls the backbone LLM δvl with certain prompts ρvl to obtain the response. Each tool-calling node vt ∈ V ′ is compiled into a function that performs tool selection and argument generation when the node is executed. Specifically, the function selects a concrete tool t ∈ T based on the intermediate context, and fills the arguments ϑt to invoke the tool, recording the returned observation. Dependency edges in E′ are compiled into the data and control flow among these functions. During compilation, we instrument each vl and vt with observation hooks. For a query qi, the runtime records the input, output, and possible error message of each executed node as node-level observations Oi. For an LLM node, the input consists of the intermediate context generated by preceding nodes and the node’s system prompt, while the output is the model response passed to downstream nodes or returned to the user. For a tool-calling node, the input consists of the tool-oriented subtask decomposed by preceding nodes and the set of available tools T . Its output includes the selected tool, the generated arguments, and the tool response passed to downstream nodes. These observations make candidate execution traceable, allowing F LOW SCOUT to identify failures such as wrong tool selection, incorrect argument generation, skipped branches, failed tool calls, or poor response synthesis. 

Workflow Execution. After compilation, we execute ˆG′ on both Dopt and Dval . For Dopt , we collect optimization feedback 

Fopt (G′) = {(ˆ πi, ˆri, Oi) | (qi, r i, π i) ∈ D opt }, where ˆπi is the produced tool orchestration trace, ˆri is the execution result, and 

Oi denotes the node-level observations collected during execu-tion. This feedback is passed to the optimizer for graph search. For Dval , we evaluate the candidate workflow by comparing each ˆπi with the validated orchestration log πi and comparing each ˆri with the reference result ri to obtain the validation feed-back TC (G′)Dval and ES (G′)Dval , respectively. This feedback is used to guide the final workflow selection. 

C. Workflow Optimizer 

Starting from the initial workflow G0, the workflow optimizer searches for a better tool-integrated agentic workflow through execution-guided graph search. We adopt Monte Carlo tree search (MCTS) [4] because it naturally fits execution-guided workflow optimization, where each iteration expands one can-didate graph, evaluates it through real execution, and uses the observed feedback to guide later search. In the search tree, each node m stores a tool-integrated agentic workflow Gm, its visit count Cm that records how many times the workflow Gm has been evaluated or passed through during backpropagation, accu-mulated reward W m that sums the scalar rewards propagated to 

m, mean reward Qm = W m 

> Cm

that estimates the historical quality of Gm, and optimization feedback Fopt (Gm) collected by the workflow executor. Each tree edge corresponds to applying one graph mutation to the parent agentic workflow. Our MCTS for workflow optimization consists of four key stages, i.e., selection , expansion , simulation , and backpropagation ,Selection. In each iteration, F LOW SCOUT selects an MCTS node to expand from the current search tree. Starting from the root node corresponding to G0, we recursively descend the search tree until reaching an expandable node m⋆. To keep the branching factor manageable, each tree node is allowed to generate at most three children in our implementation. When FLOW SCOUT reaches a node m that has generated fewer than three children, the selection process stops, and m is selected as 

m⋆ for expansion. Otherwise, F LOW SCOUT chooses one of its children according to a selection score that balances historical execution quality and exploration. For each child node mc of 

m, the selection score Score( mc) is defined by Eq. 6,         

> Score( mc) =
> 
> +∞,Cmc
> = 0 ,Qmc
> +λ
> s
> ln( Cm+ 1)
> Cmc+ 1 ,Cmc
> >0.(6)

where Qmc

is the mean reward of mc, Cm and Cmc

denote the visit counts of the parent and child nodes, and λ is the current exploration coefficient. The second term gives higher scores to less visited children, preventing the search from prematurely focusing on a small set of candidates. The coefficient λ is ad-justed by a cosine annealing schedule [22], encouraging broader exploration in early iterations and gradually shifting the search toward candidates with better scalar rewards. We select the child node with the highest score as m⋆ for expansion. 

Expansion. After selecting an expandable node m⋆, we expand it by generating a new child workflow from Gm⋆

. The expansion is guided by an LLM-based optimizer that analyzes the optimization feedback Fopt (Gm⋆

) collected by the workflow executor. Recall that each feedback item (ˆ πi, ˆri, Oi) contains the produced orchestration trace, the execution result, and node-level observations for each query qi ∈ D opt . Thus, we can com-pare ˆπi with the validated orchestration log πi to identify tool-invocation mismatches, compare ˆri with ri to identify execution failures, and inspect Oi to find problematic workflow nodes. Based on these feedback signals, the LLM-based optimizer proposes a workflow refinement plan. The plan may contain one or multiple graph edits denoted as ∆m⋆

= {o1, o 2, . . . , o L},where each operation ol is a graph edit applied to Gm⋆

. Ap-plying the refinement plan produces a new candidate workflow 

G′ = ∆ m⋆

(Gm⋆

). The operation set includes four types of edits. Node-level edits add, remove, or replace LLM nodes and tool-calling nodes. Edge-level edits add, remove, or reconnect data flow dependencies. Control-flow edits introduce or refine conditional branches, parallel branches, and retry loops. Prompt-level edits refine the system prompts of LLM nodes. For example, tool-invocation mismatches may lead to insert-ing or refining tool-calling nodes, while invalid tool arguments may lead to revising the argument generation prompt. Wrong branch activation may lead to refining conditional branches or retry loops. When the tool trace is mostly correct but the final execution score remains low, the optimizer may refine the prompt for the LLM node for response synthesis. These edits can be combined in one refinement plan when the feedback indicates coupled problems. To reduce the cost and instability of generating prompts for newly added LLM nodes, F LOW SCOUT 

Algorithm 1: FLOW SCOUT Workflow Optimizer                                                                                  

> Input: Initial workflow G0, optimization set Dopt , validation set
> Dval , maximum iterations J, patience P
> Output: Optimized workflow G∗
> 1Initialize root node of the tree Swith G0and Fopt (G0);
> 2G∗← G 0,R∗
> val ←R( G0)Dval ,p←0;
> 3for j←1to Jdo
> 4m⋆←Select( S);
> 5G′←Expand( m⋆,S.m ⋆.Fopt (Gm⋆
> )) ;
> 6R( G′)Dopt ,S.m ′.Fopt (G′)←Simulate( G′,Dopt );
> 7R( G′)Dval ←Simulate( G′,Dval );
> 8Backpropagate( S.m ′,R( G′)Dopt );
> 9if R( G′)Dval >R∗
> val then
> 10 G∗← G ′;
> 11 R∗
> val ←R( G′)Dval ;
> 12 p←0;
> 13 end
> 14 else
> 15 p←p+ 1 ;
> 16 end
> 17 if p≥Pthen
> 18 break ;
> 19 end
> 20 end
> 21 return G∗;

maintains a small library of predefined LLM-node prompt templates. These templates cover common node roles in agentic workflows, including planning, extracting, reasoning, verifying, and synthesizing. When a refinement plan inserts or replaces an LLM node, F LOW SCOUT selects the corresponding prompt template according to the intended node role, and fills it with the current workflow context and execution feedback. All prompt templates for LLM nodes along with the prompts for the LLM-based optimizer are provided on our replication website [8]. Finally, F LOW SCOUT applies the refinement plan to Gm⋆

,and the resulting candidate workflow G′ is added as a new child 

m′ of m⋆ and passed to the workflow executor for execution. 

Simulation. After expansion, we invoke the workflow executor to run the new candidate workflow G′, obtaining the execution feedback Fopt (G′). Since MCTS requires a scalar reward for backpropagation, we calculate the tool invocation correctness TC (G′)Dopt and the execution score ES (G′)Dopt on 

Dopt , and combine them into a scalar reward by Eq. 7. 

R( G′)Dopt = 12

 TC (G′)Dopt + ES (G′)Dopt 

 (7) 

The reward R( G′)Dopt is used for backpropagation, while 

Fopt (G′) is cached in the new child node for later expansion. During optimization, F LOW SCOUT also records the TC (G′)Dval 

and ES (G′)Dval , and computes the validation score R( G′)Dval 

in the same form as Eq. 7. The R( G′)Dval is used only for candidate selection and is not used to update MCTS statistics. 

Backpropagation. After simulation, F LOW SCOUT propa-gates the scalar reward R( G′)Dopt from the expanded child node back to the root node along the selected path. For each node 

mi on this path, we update Cmi

, W mi

, and Qmi

by Eq. 8. 

Cmi

← Cmi

+ 1 , W mi

← W mi

+ R( G′)Dopt , Q mi

← W mi

Cmi . (8) 

These updated statistics affect the selection in later iterations. Optimization Procedure. Algorithm 1 summarizes the optimization procedure. F LOW SCOUT first initializes the search tree S with the initial workflow G0 and its execution feedback 

Fopt (G0), and sets the initial workflow as the current best candidate workflow (Lines 1-2). In each iteration, F LOW SCOUT 

selects one node from the current search tree, and expands it into a new child workflow using the cached execution feedback (Lines 4-5). The new workflow is then simulated on the optimization set to obtain the scalar reward for MCTS update and the execution feedback for later expansion, and is also evaluated on the validation set to obtain its validation score (Lines 6-7). The scalar reward is propagated along the selected path to update the MCTS statistics (Line 8). If the validation score of the new workflow is higher than the best score observed so far, F LOW SCOUT updates the best candidate and resets the early-stopping counter p (Lines 10-12); otherwise, the counter is increased (Line 15). The search terminates when the counter reaches the patience threshold P (Line 18) or the maximum number of iterations J is reached, and finally returns the best validation candidate as G∗ (Line 21). Following [44], we set the maximum number of iterations to 30. To reduce unnecessary search cost, we further apply early stopping when the validation score does not improve for 5 iterations. IV. E VALUATION 

We implement a prototype of F LOW SCOUT with 7,768 lines of Python code. To evaluate the effectiveness and efficiency of FLOW SCOUT , we design the following four research questions.  

> •

RQ1 Effectiveness Evaluation. How effective is F LOW S- 

> COUT

in generating tool-integrated agentic workflows?  

> •

RQ2 Efficiency Evaluation. How efficient is F LOW SCOUT 

in generating tool-integrated agentic workflows?  

> •

RQ3 Ablation Study. How do the workflow miner and MCTS contribute to the final effectiveness and efficiency?  

> •

RQ4 Generalization Evaluation. Can the tool-integrated agentic workflows generated by F LOW SCOUT generalize when deployed at runtime with tools and LLM backbones different from those used during workflow generation? 

A. Evaluation Setup 

Dataset. We select four task domains, i.e., finance, sports, travel, and weather from ToolBench [28], which is a widely used benchmark including user queries, available tools ( i.e., 

remote APIs), reference execution results, and validated tool orchestration logs for task completion. We first filter out the tools yielding empty responses due to unavailable services. Then, for each task domain, we divide the remaining tools into two disjoint sets, denoted as Seen-Tools and Unseen-Tools , where each seen tool is matched with an unseen tool that provides similar functionality. The seen tools are used for agentic workflow generation, while the unseen tools are reserved for evaluating whether the generated workflows can generalize to functionally similar but previously unseen tools. Based on the validated tool orchestration logs, we associate each tool with the user queries that invoke it during task completion. For the seen tools, we collect the associated TABLE I: Statistics of the Evaluation Dataset                                

> Domain Seen-Tools Unseen-Tools
> #Tools #Qopt #Qval #Qtest #Tools #Qgene
> Finance 341 467 187 280 341 280 Sports 288 253 101 152 288 152 Travel 101 217 87 130 101 130 Weather 48 83 33 50 48 50

user queries along with their reference execution results and validated tool orchestration logs in each task domain, and split them into optimization, validation, and test sets with a ratio of 5:2:3, denoted as Qopt , Qval , and Qtest . The optimization set is used to guide workflow generation, the validation set is used to evaluate candidate workflows during the search, and the test set is held out for the final effectiveness evaluation. For the unseen tools, we collect the same number of associated user queries as Qgene along with reference execution results separately, and use them only for the generalization evaluation, so that the seen and unseen test sets are of equal size for a fair comparison. The final dataset statistics are shown in Table I. 

Baselines. We compare F LOW SCOUT with three representa-tive baselines, i.e., PM4Py [35], ReAct [42], and AFlow [44]. PM4Py is a representative workflow mining framework that discovers process models from event logs. We include PM4Py to examine whether traditional workflow mining techniques can derive effective workflows from validated tool orchestration logs. Specifically, we adapt each tool invocation in the logs as an activity and use the discovered process model as the workflow structure for task execution. ReAct is a widely used LLM agent paradigm that interleaves reasoning and acting. It serves as a standard agent baseline that solves tool-use tasks without explicitly constructing reusable workflow structures. AFlow is a recent automatic agentic workflow generation approach that searches for workflows from historical task-solving records. We include AFlow as the most related baseline, since it also automates workflow generation but mainly constructs LLM-centric workflows. For fair comparison, all approaches are evaluated on the same task domains, available tools, and test queries. Approaches requiring historical records are provided with the same seen-tool data, including user queries, reference execution results, and validated tool orchestration logs. Both AFlow and F LOW SCOUT use GPT-4o [25] as the optimization LLM for workflow construction. The workflows generated by AFlow and F LOW SCOUT , together with the ReAct agent, use GPT-4o-mini [26] as the execution LLM backbone and have access to the same tool documentation. For all baselines, we only align the input and output interfaces of their official replication artifacts to fit our evaluation dataset. 

RQ Setup. For RQ1 , we use the optimization set Qopt and validation set Qval to generate workflows with PM4Py, AFlow, and F LOW SCOUT . We then evaluate the generated workflows, together with the ReAct agent, on the test set Qtest . We report the average TC and ES across different task domains, and compare F LOW SCOUT with the baselines. We further run the workflows generated by AFlow and F LOW SCOUT for 10 times, as well as the ReAct agent, on 50 queries selected randomly in Qtest for each task domain, and compare the coefficient of variation of ES to evaluate their execution stability. For RQ2 , we evaluate the efficiency of F LOW SCOUT from both offline workflow generation and runtime execution. For offline generation, we plot the validation score of candidate workflows in 30 iterations to show how the quality of workflows evolves during the search process. For runtime execution, we measure the average execution time of the workflow generated by F LOW SCOUT on Qtest , and compare it with that of the ReAct agent and the workflow generated by AFlow. For RQ3 , we conduct ablation studies on the finance domain to examine the contribution of the workflow miner and the MCTS. We construct three variants of F LOW SCOUT , denoted as F LOW SCOUT -N OMCTS, F LOW SCOUT -N OMINER , and FLOW SCOUT -B EAM , respectively. F LOW SCOUT -N OMCTS removes the MCTS-based workflow optimizer, and directly uses the workflow mined from the historical task-solving records without further optimization. F LOW SCOUT -N OMINER 

removes the workflow miner from F LOW SCOUT , and searches for workflows from an empty skeleton using MCTS-based workflow optimizer. F LOW SCOUT -B EAM replaces MCTS with beam search [29], which keeps the top-3 workflow candidates at each search step. For fair comparison, F LOW SCOUT -N OMINER ,FLOW SCOUT -B EAM and F LOW SCOUT are allowed to generate 30 candidate workflows in total. We compare the TC and ES 

of their best candidate workflows to evaluate effectiveness, and report the total generation time cost to evaluate efficiency. For RQ4 , we evaluate the workflow generated by F LOW S- 

> COUT

from two aspects, i.e., tool-set replacement and LLM-backbone replacement, on the finance domain compared with the ReAct agent and the workflow generated by AFlow. For tool-set generalization, the tool-integrated agentic workflow is generated using Seen-Tools , and then evaluated after replacing the available tools with Unseen-Tools . For LLM backbone generalization, we keep the generated workflow topology unchanged, and replace the execution LLM backbone with DeepSeek-V3.2 [20] and Qwen3-32B [40], respectively. We report TC and ES to measure whether each approach can still support effective tool invocation and task completion. 

Environment. We conduct all the experiments on Ubuntu 20.04.4 LTS servers with 4 NVIDIA GeForce RTX 3090 GPUs, Intel(R) Xeon(R) Silver 4310 @ 2.10GHz and 128GB memory. 

B. Effectiveness Evaluation (RQ1) 

Overall Effectiveness. Table II reports the effectiveness results of F LOW SCOUT and the baselines on the test set. We do not report TC for AFlow because its generated workflow only contains LLM nodes and does not produce real-tool invocations. Overall, F LOW SCOUT consistently achieves the best performance across all four domains in terms of both tool-invocation correctness ( TC ) and execution score ( ES ). PM4Py performs markedly worse than all LLM-based approaches. Although process mining can extract tool orches-tration patterns from historical task-solving records, directly translating these patterns into executable workflows provides TABLE II: Results of the General Effectiveness                                                      

> Approach Metric Task Domain Finance Sports Travel Weather Avg. PM4Py TC 0.0550 0.0353 0.0358 0.2926 0.1047
> ES 0.1530 0.1715 0.0620 0.2680 0.1636 ReAct TC 0.5115 0.3501 0.5046 0.1939 0.3900
> ES 0.6113 0.6418 0.6184 0.6376 0.6273 AFlow TC –––––
> ES 0.6182 0.6007 0.6848 0.5651 0.6172 FLOW SCOUT TC 0.6583 0.7160 0.8028 0.8289 0.7515
> ES 0.7349 0.6944 0.7528 0.7701 0.7381 Finance Sports Travel Weather
> Task Domain
> 0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8
> CV of ES for Different Queries
> ReAct AFlow FLOW SCOUT

Fig. 3: Results of the Execution Stability limited support for query understanding, tool selection, argu-ment construction, and result synthesis. For fair comparison, we mainly compare F LOW SCOUT with LLM-based approaches. With respect to TC , F LOW SCOUT improves the average TC 

over ReAct by 92.69%. The improvement is observed in every domain, ranging from 28.70% in the finance domain to 327.49% in the weather domain. In particular, F LOW SCOUT more than doubles the TC of ReAct in the sports domain and achieves over four times its TC in the weather domain, demonstrating that the generated tool-integrated agentic workflows substantially improve the accuracy of tool selection and orchestration. With respect to ES , F LOW SCOUT improves the average ES 

by 17.66% over ReAct and 19.59% over AFlow. F LOW SCOUT 

also consistently surpasses the best-performing baseline in each domain, with relative improvements of 18.88%, 8.20%, 9.93%, and 20.78% in the finance, sports, travel, and weather domains, respectively. F LOW SCOUT outperforms both baselines in all cases, indicating that it can generate workflows that are both more effective and less sensitive to domain-specific tasks. Overall, these results demonstrate that F LOW SCOUT gener-ates workflows with more accurate tool invocation and better end-to-end task-solving performance than both general-purpose LLM agents and existing workflow-generation approaches. 

Stability Analysis. We further evaluate execution stability by repeatedly running each approach 10 times on the same test queries and computing the coefficient of variation (CV) of 

ES for each query. A lower CV indicates that the approach has more consistent execution quality across repeated runs. As shown in Fig. 3, F LOW SCOUT achieves the lowest average CV across domains. Overall, it reduces the average CV by 62.09% and 27.90% compared with ReAct and AFlow, respectively. Compared with ReAct, the improvement is particularly sub-stantial in the finance and sports domains, where F LOW SCOUT 

reduces the average CV by 68.14% and 68.03%, respectively. These domains involve relatively large tool spaces and more possible tool combinations, making unconstrained planning more susceptible to different tool selections and invocation orders across runs. This consistent reduction in CV across all domains indicates that explicitly structuring workflow benefits in complex scenarios. Compared with AFlow, F LOW SCOUT 

reduces the average CV by 20.75%, 33.22%, 8.31%, and 40.04% in the finance, sports, travel, and weather domains, respectively. The box-plot distributions show that F LOW SCOUT 

generally exhibits narrower interquartile ranges and fewer high-variation cases. Although AFlow generates reusable workflow structures, its workflows are primarily composed of LLM-centric operators without actual tool invocations. In contrast, FLOW SCOUT integrates tool-calling nodes and their dependen-cies explicitly, and refines them using execution feedback. This reduces the number of runtime decisions left to unstable LLM planning which may lead to hallucinations and consequently improves the reproducibility of execution outcomes. 

Breakdown Analysis. The observed ineffectiveness and instability can be attributed to uncertainty introduced at three stages of execution, i.e., LLM planning, tool invocation, and response synthesis. For ReAct, all three stages are dynamically determined at runtime. Variations in LLM generation may lead the agent to decompose the same query differently, select different tools, alter the invocation order, or terminate at different points, producing substantially different final execution scores. AFlow reduces part of this variation by providing reusable agentic workflows. However, because tool invocation is not represented and the agentic workflows generated by AFlow rely heavily on LLM nodes, AFlow is generally more stable than ReAct but still exhibits noticeable variation. FLOW SCOUT reduces both ineffectiveness and instability by constructing the workflow topology and explicitly model-ing tool invocations. However, the generated tool-integrated agentic workflows are not fully deterministic or universally optimal. Their effectiveness remains limited by insufficient coverage of real world queries, and errors in LLM-based query interpretation, argument generation, and response synthesis. Meanwhile, stochastic decisions within LLM nodes, varying intermediate outputs, and occasional tool failures can still lead to inconsistent execution results across repeated runs. 

Case Study. Fig. 4 illustrates an abstract workflow search process in the travel domain and the execution of the resulting tool-integrated workflow. The left part shows the selected path in the MCTS search tree, where each node represents a candi-date workflow and each edge represents a workflow mutation. Through operations such as adding nodes, inserting conditional branches, and modifying prompts, F LOW SCOUT progressively improves the validation score from 0.3420 to 0.7164. The right part shows the execution of the tool-integrated agentic workflow on a query that requests both the distance from Birmingham to Sacramento and hotel recommendations in Sacramento. The workflow first decomposes the query into distance calculation and hotel recommendation sub-tasks. It then invokes [GreatCircleDistance-KM] and 

[GreatCircleDistance-Mile] to obtain the distance in kilometers and miles, respectively. When the intermediate context is found to omit the requested hotel information by the reasoning node, the judging node activates the optional branch and invokes [HotelSearch] to retrieve hotels in Sacramento. Finally, the synthesizing node integrates the outputs of the three tools into a final response. 

Summary. FLOW SCOUT improves the tool invocation cor-rectness by at least 92.69% and execution score by at least 17.66% with better stability, compared with baselines. 

C. Efficiency Evaluation (RQ2) 

Offline Workflow Generation. Fig. 5 shows the validation scores of candidate workflows over 30 optimization iterations. Across all four domains, F LOW SCOUT finds its best workflow within 20 iterations, indicating that execution-guided search can obtain effective workflows under a bounded optimization bud-get. Compared with the initial workflows, the best candidates improve the validation scores by 92.20%, 98.13%, 109.47%, and 105.58% in the finance, sports, travel, and weather domains, respectively, demonstrating the benefit of iterative workflow optimization. Besides, these best candidates appear at iterations 20, 17, 14, and 12, respectively, where the ordering is consistent with the tool-space sizes of these four task domains. This result suggests that larger tool spaces may require more iterations to explore the optimal tool-integrated agentic workflow. 

Runtime Execution. At runtime, the agentic workflow generated by F LOW SCOUT requires 22.80 seconds per query, on average, compared with 11.44 seconds for the ReAct agent and 18.37 seconds for the agentic workflow generated by AFlow. The overhead is more pronounced relative to the ReAct agent, which performs planning and tool invocation within a comparatively compact interaction loop, while F LOW SCOUT 

may involve multiple specialized LLM nodes for planning, reasoning, judging, and synthesizing intermediate results. These nodes reduce unconstrained runtime decisions, but also introduce additional runtime cost. In contrast, the smaller gap between F LOW SCOUT and AFlow indicates that part of the runtime cost is common to workflow-based execution, while FLOW SCOUT introduces time overhead for tool invocation compared with AFlow. Considering that F LOW SCOUT improves both general effectiveness and execution stability over the baselines, the observed runtime overhead represents a trade-off between execution efficiency and workflow reliability. 

Summary. FLOW SCOUT finds effective workflows within a limited offline search budget, with at least 24.12% higher runtime cost than baselines for improved effectiveness. 

D. Ablation Study (RQ3) 

Table III reports the ablation results on the finance do-main. Among all variants, F LOW SCOUT -N OMCTS shows the largest performance degradation compared with F LOW SCOUT ,reducing TC and ES by 30.15% and 71.18%, respectively. This indicates that the mined workflow provides a useful tool Planning Node 

Verifying Node 

Tool -Calling  1 Tool -Calling  2

Synthesiz ing Node 

Tool -

Calling  3

Synthesiz ing Node 

Reasoning Node 

True 

False 

Judging Node 

Selected  Path in MCTS Search Tree  Tool -Integrated Agentic Workflow Execution                 

> Query: Find the distance from Birmingham to Sacramento in miles and kilometers, and suggest hotels in Sacramento.
> Planning: Plan distance calculation and destination hotel search.
> GreatCircleDistance -KM :The tool returns a distance of 3,149.93 km.
> GreatCircleDistance -Mile :The tool returns a distance of 1,957.3 mi.
> Synthesizing: Generate an initial draft from both distance results.
> Reasoning: Detect missing hotels by comparing the draft and query.
> Judging: Verify whether the draft fully satisfies the query.
> HotelSearch :The tool returns three Sacramento hotel suggestions.
> Verifying: Confirm that Sacramento hotel information has been added.
> Synthesizing: Combine distance and hotel into the final response.
> Response: The Birmingham –Sacramento distance is 1,957.3 miles (3,149.93 kilometers) , and recommended hotels
> include Holiday Inn Express Airport Woodland ,Holiday Inn Express Cal Expo , and Holiday Inn Downtown -Arena .
> Score:0.3420
> Score:0.4506
> Modify Prompt
> Add Node
> Insert Conditional
> Branch
> Score:0.6224
> Modify Prompt
> Score:0.7164
> Score:0.5170

Fig. 4: Examples of the Workflow Search Process and the Tool-Integrated Agentic Workflow in the Travel Domain 00.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1 Finance best: 0.7203 @ iter 20  

> 00.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1

Sports best: 0.7309 @ iter 17  

> 00.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1

Travel best: 0.7164 @ iter 14                

> 0246810 12 14 16 18 20 22 24 26 28 30

Iteration  

> 00.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1

Weather best: 0.7185 @ iter 12 

> Validation Score

Fig. 5: Validation Scores during the Search Process TABLE III: Results of the Ablation Study 

Miner MCTS Beam TC ES Time (h) FLOW SCOUT -N OMCTS ✓ 0.4598 0.2118 0.01 FLOW SCOUT -N OMINER ✓ 0.4985 0.5621 10.9 FLOW SCOUT -B EAM ✓ ✓ 0.6768 0.5327 38.88 FLOW SCOUT ✓ ✓ 0.6583 0.7349 15.39 

coordination skeleton, but still requires further optimization to become an effective tool-integrated agentic workflow. Removing the workflow miner also reduces performance. Compared with F LOW SCOUT , F LOW SCOUT -N OMINER re-duces TC by 24.27% and ES by 23.51%. Without the mined skeleton, MCTS cannot discover an optimal candidate workflow within the same candidate budget. The miner therefore provides a warm start that improves both search quality and efficiency. Replacing MCTS with beam search yields a 2.81% higher 

TC , but its ES is 27.51% lower than that of F LOW SCOUT . Beam search retains only the top-performing candidates at each step and may prematurely discard workflows that can lead to better optimization results. In contrast, MCTS models each candidate agentic workflow as a node in the search tree and explores the entire search tree for better optimization results. Regarding the time cost, F LOW SCOUT -N OMCTS is the fastest because it performs no iterative optimization, but its effectiveness is substantially lower. Under the same candidate TABLE IV: Results of Tool Generalization 

Metric ReAct AFlow FLOW SCOUT 

Seen-Tools TC 0.5115 – 0.6583 

ES 0.6113 0.6182 0.7349 

Unseen-Tools TC 0.4574 – 0.5660 

ES 0.6050 0.5874 0.6751 

budget, F LOW SCOUT takes 15.39 hours, which is 41.19% more than F LOW SCOUT -N OMINER and 60.42% less than FLOW SCOUT -B EAM . The high cost of beam search arises from maintaining and expanding multiple candidates at each search step. These results show that both workflow mining and MCTS contribute to the final effectiveness and efficiency. 

Summary. The workflow miner provides an effective ini-tialization, while MCTS further improves TC and ES over the mined-only workflow by 43.17% and 246.98%. Compared with beam search, MCTS achieves substantially higher agentic workflow quality with approximately half the time for search. 

E. Generalization Evaluation (RQ4) 

Tool-Set Generalization. Table IV reports the results after replacing the tools used during workflow generation with 

Unseen-Tools . Although all approaches show some degradation, FLOW SCOUT remains the best-performing approach on both metrics. Compared with ReAct, F LOW SCOUT improves TC by 23.74% and ES by 11.59% under the unseen tool set. It also outperforms AFlow by 14.93% in ES .After tool-set replacement, F LOW SCOUT retains 85.98% of its original TC and 91.86% of its original ES . In particular, the relatively small decrease in ES shows that the generated agentic workflow can preserve most of its task-solving capability when deployed with different available tools. Together with its continued advantage over the baselines, this result demonstrates that the generated agentic workflow is not restricted to the tools used during workflow generation. This generalization mainly stems from the separation between workflow-level orchestration and runtime tool binding. F LOW SCOUT preserves reusable task decomposition, control-flow, and dependency structures, while its tool-calling nodes dynamically select tools and construct TABLE V: Results of LLM Generalization                         

> Metric ReAct AFlow FLOW SCOUT
> GPT-4o-mini TC 0.5115 –0.6583
> ES 0.6113 0.6182 0.7349
> DeepSeek-V3.2 TC 0.5463 –0.5548
> ES 0.5676 0.5158 0.7221
> Qwen3-32B TC 0.3908 –0.5885
> ES 0.3902 0.4638 0.7239

arguments according to the tools available at runtime, rather than binding the workflow to specific tools. 

LLM-Backbone Generalization. Table V reports the re-sults after replacing GPT-4o-mini with DeepSeek-V3.2 and Qwen3-32B while keeping the generated workflow topology unchanged. F LOW SCOUT consistently achieves the highest TC 

and ES across both replacement LLMs. With DeepSeek-V3.2, FLOW SCOUT outperforms ReAct by 1.56% in TC and 27.22% in ES , and exceeds AFlow by 40.00% in ES . With Qwen3-32B, the improvements over ReAct reach 50.59% and 85.52%, respectively, while its ES is 56.08% higher than that of AFlow. After replacing the execution LLM, F LOW SCOUT retains 84.28% and 89.39% of its original TC with DeepSeek-V3.2 and Qwen3-32B, respectively. More importantly, it retains 98.26% and 98.50% of its original ES , showing that the generated workflow preserves nearly all of its capability across different LLM backbones. This is because our generated workflow explicitly specifies the roles of different LLM nodes, tool-calling positions, and their dependencies, while the execution LLM is only responsible for completing the local function of each node. Therefore, replacing the LLM backbone may affect individual decisions to some extent, but the overall task-solving capability encoded by the workflow remains reusable. 

Summary. The workflows generated by F LOW SCOUT retain 91.37% of their original TC and ES on average when deployed with different tools and LLM backbones. V. T HREATS TO VALIDITY 

First, the selection of evaluation metrics poses a threat to validity. TC may penalize alternative but valid tool invocations, while ES may be affected by the bias of the LLM-based evaluator. To mitigate this threat, we evaluate all approaches using the same reference execution results, employing a widely used LLM-based evaluator with the same prompts, and jointly report both tool-level and result-level metrics. Second, the selection and configuration of baselines pose a threat to validity, since the compared approaches adopt different workflow abstractions. To reduce this threat, we use their official replication artifacts, modify only the input and output interfaces, and align the available tools, tool documentation, execution LLM, and optimization budget whenever applicable. Third, domain coverage, workflow complexity, and historical-record quality pose threats to validity. The four evaluated domains differ in tool-set size and query distribution, but mainly contain tool-oriented tasks with relatively short tool invocation chains with at most 6 tool invocations. Thus, the findings may not fully generalize to workflows with longer tool invocation chains. Noisy or incomplete records may affect both the quality of workflow mining and optimization. We mitigate this threat by conducting experiments on manually validated records. Finally, randomness in LLM generation, workflow search, and LLM-based evaluation poses a threat to result reliability. To mitigate this threat, we independently generate and evaluate workflows in four task domains with different tool sets and query distributions, where F LOW SCOUT consistently outper-forms the baselines. Query-level paired tests further show that these improvements are statistically significant across domains after Holm correction [11] (p adj < 0.05 ), with 95% bootstrap confidence intervals excluding zero and Cohen’s d > 0.63 [5]. We also repeat execution 10 times on 50 randomly selected queries per domain, and report the coefficient of variation of ES . These cross-domain, statistical, and repeated-execution results reduce the likelihood that the observed improvements are caused by a particular domain or an individual execution run. VI. R ELATED WORK 

Recent studies and platforms [6, 15, 16, 17, 36] have facilitated the construction of agentic workflows. Developer-oriented frameworks such as LangChain [15], LangGraph [16], and AutoGen [36] provide programming abstractions for com-posing LLMs, tools, memory modules and control logic. These frameworks make it easier for developers to implement agentic workflows, but they still require manual programming and careful design of workflow structures. Low-code platforms such as Dify [17] and Coze [6] offer visual interfaces for connecting workflow components. Although these platforms reduce the engineering effort of building agentic workflows, they still rely on users to manually specify workflow structures, tool connections, and control logic based on domain knowledge. To further reduce the manual effort, some studies have started to explore automatic generation of LLM agents [12, 31] or agen-tic workflows [18, 44, 47]. Hu et al. [12] and Shang et al. [31] search over modular agent designs by composing LLMs, mem-ory modules, external tools and prompts. AutoFlow [18] parses user queries and uses LLMs to decompose them into executable workflows at the query level, relying on the task decomposition ability of LLMs for each individual query. The most related works to ours are AFlow [44] and A 2Flow [47], which also use historical task-solving records, including user queries and exe-cution results, to search for agentic workflows. However, their generated agentic workflows only consist of LLM nodes, where LLMs act as general-purpose modules for solving different subtasks. In contrast, F LOW SCOUT models real tool invocations as workflow nodes, and constructs the topology between LLM reasoning and external tools. Guided by execution feedback on historical task-solving records, it uses Monte Carlo tree search to generate agentic workflows that are more usable and stable. We do not compare F LOW SCOUT with A 2Flow, as it follows the general idea of AFlow and is not publicly available. VII. C ONCLUSION 

We have proposed and implemented F LOW SCOUT , a frame-work for automatic domain-specific agentic workflow gen-eration. F LOW SCOUT formulates the agentic workflow as a structured graph composed of LLM nodes, tool-calling nodes and dependency edges that encode control and data dependen-cies, and searches for the optimal workflow topology guided by historical task-solving records. Large-scale experiments have been conducted to demonstrate its effectiveness and efficiency. VIII. D ATA AVAILABILITY 

The source code and data of our work are available at [8]. REFERENCES [1] Anthropic, “Building effective agents,” https://www.anthropic.com/engi neering/building-effective-agents, 2024, accessed: 2026-05-28. [2] P. Bertoli, M. Pistore, and P. Traverso, “Automated composition of web services via planning in asynchronous domains,” Artificial Intelligence ,vol. 174, no. 3-4, pp. 316–361, 2010. [3] I. Bouzenia, P. Devanbu, and M. Pradel, “Repairagent: An autonomous, llm-based agent for program repair,” in Proceedings of the 47th IEEE/ACM International Conference on Software Engineering , 2025, pp. 2188–2200. [4] C. B. Browne, E. Powley, D. Whitehouse, S. M. Lucas, P. I. Cowling, P. Rohlfshagen, S. Tavener, D. Perez, S. Samothrakis, and S. Colton, “A survey of monte carlo tree search methods,” IEEE Transactions on Computational Intelligence and AI in games , vol. 4, no. 1, pp. 1–43, 2012. [5] J. Cohen, Statistical Power Analysis for the Behavioral Sciences , 2nd ed. Lawrence Erlbaum Associates, 1988. [6] Coze, “Coze studio: An ai agent development platform,” https://github.c om/coze-dev/coze-studio, 2025, accessed: 2026-05-19. [7] F. Friedrich, J. Mendling, and F. Puhlmann, “Process model generation from natural language text,” in Proceedings of the 23rd international conference on Advanced information systems engineering , 2011, pp. 482–496. [8] A. Github. (2026) Flowscout. Accessed: 2026-05-28. [Online]. Available: https://anonymous.4open.science/r/xxxx/ [9] Google, “Google gemini,” https://gemini.google.com/, 2023, accessed: 2026-05-28. [10] H. He, W. Yao, K. Ma, W. Yu, Y. Dai, H. Zhang, Z. Lan, and D. Yu, “Webvoyager: Building an end-to-end web agent with large multimodal models,” in Proceedings of the 62nd Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics , 2024, pp. 6864–6890. [11] S. Holm, “A simple sequentially rejective multiple test procedure,” 

Scandinavian Journal of Statistics , vol. 6, no. 2, pp. 65–70, 1979. [12] S. Hu, C. Lu, and J. Clune, “Automated design of agentic systems,” in Proceedings of the 13th International Conference on Learning Representations , 2025. [13] M. Kim, T. Stennett, S. Sinha, and A. Orso, “A multi-agent approach for rest api testing with semantic graphs and llm-driven inputs,” in 

Proceedings of the 47th IEEE/ACM International Conference on Software Engineering , 2025, pp. 1409–1421. [14] S. Kim, S. Moon, R. Tabrizi, N. Lee, M. W. Mahoney, K. Keutzer, and A. Gholami, “An llm compiler for parallel function calling,” in 

Proceedings of the 41st International Conference on Machine Learning ,2024, pp. 24 370–24 391. [15] LangChain, “Langchain: The agent engineering platform,” https://github .com/langchain-ai/langchain, 2025, accessed: 2026-05-19. [16] ——, “Langgraph: Low-level orchestration framework for building stateful agents,” https://github.com/langchain- ai/langgraph, 2025, accessed: 2026-05-19. [17] LangGenius, “Dify: Production-ready platform for agentic workflow,” https://github.com/langgenius/dify, 2025, accessed: 2026-05-19. [18] Z. Li, S. Xu, K. Mei, W. Hua, B. Rama, O. Raheja, H. Wang, H. Zhu, and Y. Zhang, “Autoflow: Automated workflow generation for large language model agents,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2407.12821 , 2024. [19] F. Lin, D. J. Kim, and T.-H. Chen, “Soen-101: Code generation by emulating software process models using large language model agents,” in 

2025 IEEE/ACM 47th International Conference on Software Engineering .IEEE, 2025, pp. 1527–1539. [20] A. Liu, A. Mei, B. Lin, B. Xue, B. Wang, B. Xu, B. Wu, B. Zhang, C. Lin, C. Dong et al. , “Deepseek-v3. 2: Pushing the frontier of open large language models,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2512.02556 , 2025. [Online]. Available: https://arxiv.org/abs/2512.02556 [21] Y. Liu, D. Iter, Y. Xu, S. Wang, R. Xu, and C. Zhu, “G-eval: Nlg evaluation using gpt-4 with better human alignment,” in Proceedings of the 2023 conference on empirical methods in natural language processing ,2023, pp. 2511–2522. [22] I. Loshchilov and F. Hutter, “Sgdr: Stochastic gradient descent with warm restarts,” Learning , vol. 10, p. 3. [23] A. Mastropaolo, F. Zampetti, G. Bavota, and M. Di Penta, “Toward automatically completing github workflows,” in Proceedings of the 46th IEEE/ACM International Conference on Software Engineering , 2024, pp. 1–12. [24] OpenAI, “Introducing chatgpt,” https://openai.com/blog/chatgpt, 2023, accessed: 2026-05-28. [25] OpenAI, “Gpt-4o,” https://developers.openai.com/api/docs/models/gpt-4 o/, 2024, accessed: 2026-05-28. [26] ——, “Gpt-4o-mini,” hhttps://developers.openai.com/api/docs/models/gp t-4o-mini, 2024, accessed: 2026-05-28. [27] ——, “Introducing deep research,” https://openai.com/index/introducing -deep-research/, 2025, accessed: 2026-06-03. [28] Y. Qin, S. Liang, Y. Ye, K. Zhu, L. Yan, Y. Lu, Y. Lin, X. Cong, X. Tang, B. Qian et al. , “Toolllm: Facilitating large language models to master 16000+ real-world apis,” in Proceedings of the 12th International Conference on Learning Representations , 2024. [29] S. J. Russell and P. Norvig, Artificial Intelligence: A Modern Approach ,4th ed. Pearson, 2021, global Edition. [30] T. Schick, J. Dwivedi-Yu, R. Dess´ ı, R. Raileanu, M. Lomeli, E. Hambro, L. Zettlemoyer, N. Cancedda, and T. Scialom, “Toolformer: language models can teach themselves to use tools,” in Proceedings of the 37th International Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems ,2023, pp. 68 539–68 551. [31] Y. Shang, Y. Li, K. Zhao, L. Ma, J. Liu, F. Xu, and Y. Li, “Agentsquare: Automatic llm agent search in modular design space,” in Proceedings of the 13th International Conference on Learning Representations , 2025. [32] N. Shinn, F. Cassano, E. Berman, A. Gopinath, K. Narasimhan, and S. Yao, “Reflexion: Language agents with verbal reinforcement learning,” in Proceedings of the 37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems , 2023. [33] E. Sirin, B. Parsia, D. Wu, J. Hendler, and D. Nau, “Htn planning for web service composition using shop2,” Journal of Web Semantics , vol. 1, no. 4, pp. 377–396, 2004. [34] J. Su, Q. Lan, Y. Xia, L. Sun, W. Tian, T. Shi, and L. He, “Difficulty-aware agentic orchestration for query-specific multi-agent workflows,” in 

Proceedings of the ACM Web Conference 2026 , 2026, pp. 2060–2070. [35] W. Van der Aalst, T. Weijters, and L. Maruster, “Workflow mining: Discovering process models from event logs,” IEEE Transactions on Knowledge and Data Engineering , vol. 16, no. 9, pp. 1128–1142, 2004. [36] Q. Wu, G. Bansal, J. Zhang, Y. Wu, B. Li, E. Zhu, L. Jiang, X. Zhang, S. Zhang, J. Liu, A. H. Awadallah, A. White, D. Burger, and C. Wang, “AutoGen: Enabling next-gen LLM applications via multi-agent conver-sation,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2308.08155 , 2023. [37] C. S. Xia, Y. Deng, S. Dunn, and L. Zhang, “Demystifying llm-based software engineering agents,” Proceedings of the ACM on Software Engineering , vol. 2, no. FSE, pp. 801–824, 2025. [38] H. Xu, X. Huang, Y. Liu, and Z. Deng, “Tps-bench: Evaluating ai agents’ tool planning & scheduling abilities in compounding tasks,” in Proceedings of the 64th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers) , 2026, pp. 34 949– 34 961. [39] J. Xu, W. Du, X. Liu, and X. Li, “Llm4workflow: An llm-based automated workflow model generation tool,” in Proceedings of the 39th IEEE/ACM International Conference on Automated Software Engineering , 2024, pp. 2394–2398. [40] A. Yang, A. Li, B. Yang, B. Zhang, B. Hui, B. Zheng, B. Yu, C. Gao, C. Huang, C. Lv, C. Zheng, D. Liu, F. Zhou, F. Huang, F. Hu, H. Ge, H. Wei, H. Lin, J. Tang, J. Yang, J. Tu, J. Zhang, J. Yang, J. Yang, J. Zhou, J. Zhou, J. Lin, K. Dang, K. Bao, K. Yang, L. Yu, L. Deng, M. Li, M. Xue, M. Li, P. Zhang, P. Wang, Q. Zhu, R. Men, R. Gao, S. Liu, S. Luo, T. Li, T. Tang, W. Yin, X. Ren, X. Wang, X. Zhang, X. Ren, Y. Fan, Y. Su, Y. Zhang, Y. Zhang, Y. Wan, Y. Liu, Z. Wang, Z. Cui, Z. Zhang, Z. Zhou, and Z. Qiu, “Qwen3 technical report,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2505.09388 , 2025. [Online]. Available: https://arxiv.org/abs/2505.09388 [41] J. Yang, C. E. Jimenez, A. Wettig, K. Lieret, S. Yao, K. Narasimhan, and O. Press, “Swe-agent: Agent-computer interfaces enable automated software engineering,” in Proceedings of the 38th International Confer-ence on Neural Information Processing Systems , ser. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, vol. 37, 2024, pp. 50 528–50 652. [42] S. Yao, J. Zhao, D. Yu, N. Du, I. Shafran, K. Narasimhan, and Y. Cao, “React: Synergizing reasoning and acting in language models,” in Proceedings of the 11th International Conference on Learning Representations , 2023. [43] L. Yue, K. R. Bhandari, C.-Y. Ko, D. Patel, S. Lin, N. Zhou, J. Gao, P.-Y. Chen, and S. Pan, “From static templates to dynamic runtime graphs: a survey of workflow optimization for llm agents,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2603.22386 , 2026. [44] J. Zhang, J. Xiang, Z. Yu, F. Teng, X. Chen, J. Chen, M. Zhuge, X. Cheng, S. Hong, J. Wang, B. Zheng, B. Liu, Y. Luo, and C. Wu, “Aflow: Automating agentic workflow generation,” in Proceedings of the 13th International Conference on Learning Representations , 2025. [45] W. Zhang, Y. Li, Y. Bei, J. Luo, G. Wan, L. Yang, C. Xie, Y. Yang, W.-C. Huang, C. Miao et al. , “From web search towards agentic deep research: Incentivizing search with reasoning agents,” arXiv e-prints , pp. arXiv–2506, 2025. [46] Y. Zhang, H. Ruan, Z. Fan, and A. Roychoudhury, “Autocoderover: Autonomous program improvement,” in Proceedings of the 33rd ACM SIGSOFT International Symposium on Software Testing and Analysis ,2024, pp. 1592–1604. [47] M. Zhao, X. Wei, Y. Shao, K. Zhou, L. Yang, S. Rao, J. Zhan, and Z. Chen, “A2Flow: Automating agentic workflow generation via self-adaptive abstraction operators,” in Proceedings of the 40th AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence , 2026. [48] C. Zheng, J. Chen, Y. Lyu, W. Z. T. Ng, H. Zhang, Y.-S. Ong, I. Tsang, and H. Yin, “Mermaidflow: Redefining agentic workflow generation via safety-constrained evolutionary programming,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2505.22967 ,2025.