Title: Template for Electronic Submission to ACS Journals

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2606.13900v1

Published Time: Mon, 15 Jun 2026 00:14:00 GMT

Number of Pages: 45

Markdown Content:
1

# Multi -modal machine learning analysis of GaSe 

# molecular beam epitaxy growth conditions 

Mingyu Yu, † Isaiah A. Moses, ‡ Wesley F. Reinhart, §, 

> ‖

Stephanie Law *, §

> †

Department of Materials Science and Engineering, University of Delaware, Newark, Delaware 

19716, United States 

> ‡

Materials Research Institute, Pennsy lvania State University, University Park, Pennsylvania 

16827, United States 

> §

Department of Materials Science and Engineering, Pennsylvania State University, University 

Park, Pennsylvania 16827, United States 

> ‖

Institute for Computational and Data Science, Pennsylvania State University, University Park, 

Pennsylvania 16827, United States 

> *

Corresponding author: Stephanie Law 

Email: slaw@psu.edu 

KEYWORDS : machine learning, molecular beam epitaxy, autonomous synthesis platform, in -situ 

diagnostics , van der Waals chalcogenides .2

ABSTRACT : Autonomous synthesis platforms integrating machine learning with in -situ 

diagnostics have the potential to revolutionize thin -film growth by enabling real -time process 

optimization and reducing the need for manual tuning. However, their application to molecular 

beam epitaxy (MBE) remains underdeveloped. Here, we present a mach ine learning -guided 

framework for MBE growth of GaSe films, leveraging reflection high -energy electron diffraction 

(RHEED) as an in -situ diagnostic alongside ex -situ characterization v ia X -ray diffraction and 

atomic force microscopy. Unsupervised learning on RHEED patterns reveals a well -defined 

boundary between high - and low -quality samples, capturing physically meaningful features. 

Mutual information analysis shows a strong correlation between RHEED embeddings and rocking 

curve full -width at half maximum (FWHM), while the correlation with AFM root -mean -square 

(RMS) roughness is weak. Among key growth conditions, growth rate most strongly inf luences 

FWHM, whereas the Se:Ga flux ratio pr imarily affects RMS roughness and the RHEED 

embeddings. Supervised learning models trained to predict FWHM and RMS roughness 

demonstrate moderate accuracy, with significant improvement achieved by incorporating RHEED 

embeddings. Furthermore, anomaly detect ion via residual analysis in supervised learning aligns 

well with unsupervised classification from RHEED, reinforcing the reliability of the predictive 

models. This study establishes a data -driven framework for machine learning -assisted MBE, 

paving the way for real -time process control and accelerated optimization of thin -film synthesis .3

1. INTRODUCTION 

The rapid advancements in machine learning, artificial intelligence, and high -performance 

computing are providing transformative technological tools for the exploration and synthesis of 

new materials. 1-5 Machine learning models, constructed by integrating theoretical and empirical 

approaches, hold the potential to explore parameter space autonomously, quickly establish 

process -performance relationships, and diagnose material synthesis in real time. 6,7 This reduces 

reliance on manual intervention in parameter sp ace exploration, enabling more precise and 

efficient mechanistic control — an essential direction for advancing materials science. 8,9 

Typically, material synthesis workflows involve characterization techniques, such as X -

ray diffraction (XRD), atomic force microscopy (AFM), and photoluminescence, to analyze and 

optimize material properties. Solution -based synthesis methods can already be integrated with 

these characterization tools to form commercial pipeline systems. 1, 10,11 In contrast, vapor phase 

deposition methods have yet to achieve efficient autonomous production platforms. 12 -14 For 

molecular beam epitaxy (MBE), despite its breakthr oughs in synthesizing materials such as 

chalcogenides, III -V compounds, oxides, and nitrides — particularly its unparalleled ability to 

produce high -quality, atomically thin crystalline films — its stringent growth conditions and 

complex epitaxial mechanis ms make the process of optimizing growth process time -consuming 

and expensive. 15 -20 Therefore, leveraging machine learning to develop autonomous MBE growth 

platforms presents a highly promising prospect. A Bayesian approach was reported to optimize 

metal -organic MBE synthesis for highly crystalline TiN films. 21 C. C. Price et al. 22 developed 

predictive models using in situ reflection high -energy electron diffraction (RHEED) data for ex 

situ analysis. However, research on employing machine learning for real -time anomaly detection 

remains limited. 4

Our study on the multi -modal machine learning -guided MBE synthesis is based on a 

comprehensive high -quality dataset of GaSe thin films grown on GaAs (111)B substrates. 23,2 4

GaSe is an emerging two -dimensional (2D) semiconductor material with intriguing properties, 

including thickness -tunable bandgaps, nonlinear optical behaviors, and intrinsic p-type 

conductivity, 25-31 making it a promising candidate for applications in electronics, optics, and 

optoelectronics. 32 -37 Moreover, as a representative member of the van der Waals (vdW) 

chalcogenide semiconductor family, 38-40 insights gained from studying GaSe can be extended to 

other vdW chalcogenides. The ultra -high vacuum environment of MBE, along with precise control 

over source materials and temperature, enables the synthesis of GaSe thin films with high purity, 

well -orde red crystallinity, controlled layer thickness, and smooth surfaces. 23,24,30 ,41 -47 However, 

optimizing the interrelated growth conditions experimentally necessitates extensive trial and error. 

In this work, we aim to leverage machine learning to analyze the relationships between 

various growth conditions (Ga flux, which represents growth rate as Ga is the limiting element in 

GaSe MBE growth, Se:Ga flux ratio, and substrate temperature) and the r esulting sample quality, 

as well as the correlations among various characterization results. This approach seeks to predict 

sample properties based on input growth conditions and autonomously adjust the synthesis process 

in real -time using feedback from in -situ diagnostic technique —RHEED, which reveals real -time 

information on crystallinity and surface quality of top layers during MBE growth. 48 -51 The main 

ex -situ characterization modalities include high -resolution XRD ω scan — full -width at half 

maximum (FWHM) of rocking curves are used to quantify the crystallinity of the film; and AFM 

— providing root -mean -square (RMS) roughness of the surface. Previous studies 52 -55 have 

reported the application of principal component analysis (PCA) and  𝑘 -means clusteri ng methods 

to identify features and trends in RHEED signals and have applied these approaches to the growth 5

of perovskite, Fe xOy, and transition metal dichalcogenide thin film s. Our unsupervised learning 

model is capable of autonomously interpreting the physical meaning embedded in RHEED 

patterns and identifying the crystallinity of the samples. In addition , machine learning has been 

reported to effectively classify AFM images and recognize surface features, 56-58 as well as extract 

information related to phase, lattice, defects, and substituents from XRD measurements. 59 

Our research focuses on understanding the relationships between growth conditions and 

these characterization results, as well as the correlation between in situ and ex situ characterization 

metrics, aiming to achieve quantitative analysis through machine learning . Mutual information 

(MI) analysis identified the growth conditions with the most significant impacts on crystallinity 

and surface roughness, as well as the correlations among RHEED patterns, FWHM crystallinity, 

and RMS roughness. These findings we re further validated by feature importance analysis. 

Supervised learning, on the other hand, constructed predictive models for two characterization 

quantities, RMS roughness and FWHM crystallinity, both achieving moderate predictive accuracy. 

Notably, the combination of the RHEED embeddings and the FWHM prediction model not only 

enhanced FWHM predictability but also demonstrated the capability of RHEED embeddings to 

detect anomalous samples. Our work provides valuable insights for developing machine learnin g-

guided experimental design and contributes to unlocking the full potential of RHEED as an in -situ 

monitoring tool. 

2. EXPERIMENTAL SECTION 

2.1. MBE Synthesis. GaSe film samples in this study were grown on epi -ready GaAs(111)B 

substrates using a DCA Instrument R450 MBE reactor (instrument details at DOI: 10.60551/gqq8 -

yj90). The GaAs (111)B wafers, ordered from Wafer Tech, have a primary flat oriented along th e

[01 1̅] direction. Before use, wafers were diced into 1cm × 1cm pieces and ultrasonically cleaned 6

sequentially in acetone, isopropanol, and deionized water for 10 minutes each. After drying with 

nitrogen, the substrates were immediately transferred to the load lock chamber and degassed at 

200 oC in a vacuum of about 5 × 10 -7 Torr for 2 hours to remove residual contaminants. Prior to 

GaSe growth, the substrate was deoxidized and Se -passivated in the main chamber, as detailed in 

Ref. 23 , and then cooled to the designated growth temperature. Ga and Se fluxes were 

independently supplied by Knudsen effusion cells, which were measured at the substrate position 

using a quartz crystal microbalance. The growth temperature was monitored with a non -contact 

thermocouple positioned behind the substrate. As thermocouple readings typically deviate from 

the actual substrate temperature, we provide a reference point: in our MBE system, the 

thermocouple measured 680 °C for GaAs substrate deoxidation, 23 ,24 which typically occurs at a 

temperature of about 580 °C. 60,61 All GaSe films in this study were grown to a target thic kness of 

24 nm .

RHEED was used for real -time monitoring of the sample during growth. It is a powerful 

tool commonly employed in MBE to observe the crystallinity and morphology of the growing 

surface. Generally, for smooth single -crystal epitaxial films, incident electrons diffract from the 

surface layers, producing streaky patterns on the RHEED screen as the Ewald sphere intersects the 

reciprocal lattice rods perpendicular to the surface. For rough single -crystal films with islands, 

electrons transmit through the islands a nd diffract from near -surface planes, forming sharp spot 

patterns. Polycrystalline films generate continuous ring patterns due to electron diffraction from 

randomly oriented planes, while amorphous surfaces exhibit no discernible diffraction patterns. 62 

RHEED patterns can also reveal twin defects and stacking faults, as streak spacing and 

arrangement are closely linked to the surface lattice structure and reconstruction. 63,6 4 The RHEED 

patterns used in this study were taken at the end of the growth of e ach sample. 7

This study included 37 GaSe samples in the machine learning analysis . We used a Sobol 

sequence to generate growth parameters for the 37 samples. Detailed growth parameters and 

sample IDs are provided in Table S1 , indicating a wide distribution in the parameter space of Ga 

flux, Se:Ga flux ratio, and growth temperature. 

2.2 . Ex -situ Characterizations. High -resolution XRD measurements were conducted on a 

Malvern PANalytical 4 -Circle X’Pert 3 diffractometer with a Cu -Kα 1 source. ω scans were rocked 

around the GaSe (004) diffraction peak, the most intense characteristic peak of GaSe crystals. The 

ω scan range was 7.113 o to 15.103 o, with a step size of 0.01 o and a counting time of 0.44 s econds 

per step. The FWHM of the rocking curves quantifies the crystallinity of GaSe films, where a 

larger FWHM indicates a higher defect d ensity. These values were extracted from the raw data 

using the X -ray Utilities Python package. Surface morphology and RMS roughness were examined 

using a Bruker Dimension Icon AFM. Measurements were taken over a 1 μm × 1 μm area with a 

resolution of 512 × 512 pixels and a scan rate of 1 Hz. The RMS roughness was determined as the 

root -mean -squared error between the Gaussian smoothed and the original image. Table S2 

summarizes the FWHM and RMS roughness data for all GaSe samples, as well as the RHEED 

embedd ing components  𝑍 . All ex -situ characterizations were completed within 24 hours of sample 

removal from the MBE chamber to minimize GaSe degradation. The raw data for synthesis and 

characterization can be found in Ref. 65. 

3. MACHINE LEARNING 

3.1 . Unsupervised Learning. We applied the Uniform Manifold Approximation and Projection 

(UMAP) method for unsupervised representation learning (implemented in the umap -learn Python 

package). 66 UMAP construct s a nearest -neighbor graph to generate a low -dimensional manifold 

with approximately constant density while preserving the topology of the original feature space. 8

UMAP accounts for non -linear relationships in the data, unlike other low dimensional 

representation s such as the principal component analysis (PCA) 67 and non -negative matrix 

factorization ( NMF ).68 While clustering approaches might also be suitable for identifying groups 

of similar samples, embedding offer s the possibility of multiple feature axes and completely 

smooth class boundaries . Furthermore, since we do not know a priori whether discrete groups 

should exist in the dataset, dimensionality reduction is more appropriate. 

None of these common techniques, including UMAP, directly lend themselves to 

embedding image data, as pixel -wise lightness values suffer from spurious translation, rotation, 

and scale dependencies. Therefore, we designed a custom distance metric to compare RHEED 

samples as follows :

𝑑 RHEED (𝑅 𝑖 , 𝑅 𝑗 ) = |𝑊 (𝑅 𝑖 , 𝜃 𝑖 ) − 𝑊 (𝑅 𝑗 , 𝜃 𝑗 )|2𝜃 𝑖 ,𝜃 𝑗  

> min

(1) 

where  𝑅 𝑖  indicates RHEED image  𝑖 , 𝑊  indicates a 256 × 512 – pixel window taken from  𝑅 𝑖  as 

parameterized by  𝜃 𝑖  , and |∙|2 indicates the  𝐿 2 norm. The parameterization  𝜃 𝑖 = (𝑥 𝑖 , 𝑦 𝑖 , 𝛼 𝑖 )

determines the center  (𝑥 𝑖 , 𝑦 𝑖 ) of the window  𝑊  within  𝑅  while  𝛼 𝑖  determines the rotation angle of 

𝑊  with respect to  𝑅 . Images were used directly as captured from the RHEED instrument. The 

minimization was performed with the scipy implementation of the Nelder -Mead simplex algorithm. 

The final distance metric used in the UMAP embedding is the minimum over all RHEED taken 

on a given sample: 

𝑑 sample ({𝑅 }𝑖 , {𝑅 }𝑗 ) = 𝑑 RHEED (𝑅 𝑘 , 𝑅 𝑙 )𝑘 ,𝑙  

> min

(2) 

where {𝑅 }𝑖  indicates the complete set of RHEED images taken for a sample  𝑖 , such that the final 

distance  𝑑 sample  is defined once per pair of samples by the best -aligned pair of RHEED images 

from the two samples. Practically, this avoids the ambiguity of trying to decide which plane is 

represented by amorphous samples; both GaSe  [11̅00 ] and  [11 2̅ 0] planes were measured from 9

highly crystalline samples, but only one measurement was taken from weak ly crystalline samples 

due to their similar appearance. 

3.2 . Mutual Information (MI). MI quantifies how much knowing one variable’s value reduces 

uncertainty about another variable. 69 We estimated this by examining the local density of data 

points in both the joint space (𝑋 , 𝑌 ) and the individual spaces (i.e.,  𝑋  and  𝑌  separately). When  𝑋 

and  𝑌  are strongly related, points that are close together in  𝑋  tend to be close together in  𝑌  as well, 

resulting in higher MI values. Conversely, when they are independent, knowing a point ’s location 

in  𝑋  provides no information about its location in  𝑌 , resulting in MI close to zero. Like UMAP, 

MI account s for non -linear trends with in the data. We estimated MI using a  𝑘 -nearest neighbor 

approach based on the Kraskov -Stögbauer -Grassberger (KSG) algorithm, 70 given by the function :

𝑀𝐼 (𝑋 , 𝑌 ) = 𝜓 (𝑛 ) + 𝜓 (𝑘 ) − 〈𝜓 (𝑛 𝑥 + 1) + 𝜓 (𝑛 𝑦 + 1)〉 (3) 

where  𝜓  is the digamma function (for normalization) , 𝑛  is the sample size, and  𝑘  is the number of 

nearest neighbors (we used  𝑘 = 3).  𝑛 𝑥  and  𝑛 𝑦  are the numbers of points within a given radius in 

the marginal spaces  𝑋  and  𝑌 , respectively. The algorithm used the Chebyshev distance metric for 

nearest -neighbor searches. Data were preprocessed using the Standard scaler in scikit -learn. The 

MI implementation was also adapted from the scikit -learn library ’s mutual information estimato r. 

3.3 . Supervised Learning. It was performed to model the relationship between MBE growth 

recipe and resulting measurements. The small number of available samples makes deep learning 

unsuitable . Therefore, we used a Random Forest model 71 due to the nonlinear nature of the task 

and the superiority of decision tree ensembles for modeling tabular data. Random Forest also 

provides an advantage in that no preprocessing is required to handle variable distribution or 

magnitude; all inputs were provided in the form indicated in Tables S1 and S2 . While some 

hyperparameter tuning was investigated, no compelling relationship between hyperparameters and 10 

model validation performance was found. As a result, the default model hyperparameters for the 

scikit -learn implementation were used (most importantly, 100 estimators and no maximum tree 

depth), except for specifying a fixed random state. We also note that other standard regression 

models available in scikit -learn were investigated, such as linear regression (and regularized 

variants), polynomial regression, Gaussian Process, gradient boosting, and shallow neural 

networks . None of these gave improved perfor mance, and many required more complex feature 

engineering (such as rescaling), making Random Forest the most appealing choice. 

Due to the limited data, t he regression models were trained and evaluated using Leave -

One -Out (LOO) cross -validation (CV) ,72 so for  𝑁  samples,  𝑁  models were trained on the 

remaining  𝑁 − 1 observations and evaluated against the one held -out observation. This emulates 

deploying the model to grow one new sample N times, once for each sample we have , and scores 

the result . This method was selected due to the small size of the available dataset and high 

variability between samples, which made typical cross -fold validation difficult to interpret. 

Regressors were evaluated on the held -out data by computing the coefficient of d etermination,  𝑅 2,

over the entire held -out set. Reported  𝑅 2 values thus reflect the ensemble of  𝑁  regression models 

trained on  𝑁  different folds, more generally describing a modeling strategy rather than a specific 

trained model. The machine learning processed data and code can be found in Ref. 73.

4. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION 

4.1. Unsupervised RHEED Embeddings. We began with unsupervised learning on RHEED 

patterns as they provided real -time information . Figure 1 shows a UMAP projection of RHEED 

pattern, where closer data points indicate greater similarity in RHEED signals , illustrat ing how the 

RHEED patterns vary with the  𝑍 0 and  𝑍 1 embeddings. As RHEED serves as a qualitative indicator 

of the growth surface condition: sharp, well -defined, and periodically occurring streaky patterns 11 

typically signify high crystallinity and smoothness; the appearance of dot or dashed patterns 

indicates the formation of protrusion features, while blurred, broadened streaks suggest a decline 

in crystallinity. Figure 1 shows a smooth transition at  𝑍 0 = 1 between the two regions . Samples 

with  𝑍 0 > 1 are labeled as “low quality ”, while those with  𝑍 0 < 1 are considered “high quality ”.

The low -quality samples exhibit spotty RHEED patterns associated with 3D island formation . In 

contrast, high -quality sample s generally display sharp, continuous streaks, indicative of an 

atomically smooth crystalline surface . Within this set,  𝑍 1 generally correlates with surface 

crystallinity , where lower values correspond to sharper streaks ( high er crystallinity) . However, a

few high -quality sample s, such as Samples #7 and #33, exhibit weak and broad streak s, indicating 

reduced crystallinity. This suggests that the spatial arrangement is not solely based on sample 

quality. As discussed in Section 4.3.3 on anomaly detection , the so -called “low -quality ” samples 

are more likely those that deviate from normal growth behavior , thus compromising modeling 

accuracy and reliability . These findings suggest that the latent embedding derived from 

unsupervised learning on RHEED data effectively captures physically meaningful features of the 

images and reveals certain trends, providing a robust foundation for furt her analysis. 12 

Figure 1. Unsupervised UMAP embedding of RHEED signals . The spatial arrangement of 

RHEED signals in the figure illustrate s how they vary over the  𝑍 0 and  𝑍 1 embeddings. Sample 

numbers are indicated in the lower left of each RHEED panel. The RHEED embeddings  𝑍 0 and 

𝑍 1 have no physical units. “High quality ” and “low quality ” refer to samples that follow and 

deviate from normal growth behavior, respectively, as discussed in Section 4.3.3. 

4.2. Mutual Information (MI) Analysis. Next, we computed the MI between individual growth 

conditions (Ga flux, Se:Ga flux ratio, and growth temperature) and various characterization 

parameters, including the learned RHEED embedding  𝑍  and conventional scalar response 

variables such as rocking curve FWHM and AFM RMS roughness. This analysis assesses the 13 

relatedness among these variables. Figure 2 shows the results of the pairwise MI calculations. 

While high MI is not expected between independently varied growth conditions, a relatively high 

MI of 0.39 was observed between Ga flux and growth temperature. This correlation arises because 

Ga flux needs to be adjusted at elevated substrate temperatures to compensate for GaSe 

evaporation from the surface. Otherwise, low MI here indicates good diversity in training data for 

our supervised models . Focusing on the correlations between conventional scalar quantities 

(FHWM and RMS roughness) and growth conditions, we find that for FWHM, the only condition 

showing a weak correlation (MI = 0.09) was Ga flux, while RMS roughness shows a significant 

correlation with the S e:Ga flux ratio (MI = 0.5). These MI analysis results align with our previously 

reported experimental observations, 24 ,41 which indicate that in MBE growth of GaSe films, 

crystallinity is primarily influenced by the growth rate, whereas surface morphology i s highly 

sensitive to Se:Ga flux ratio. Interestingly, all three growth conditions exhibit consistent, moderate 

correlations with the learned RHEED embeddings, with MI of 0.34, 0.30, and 0.28 for the Se:Ga 

flux ratio, growth temperature, and Ga flux, respectively. On the other hand, the RHEED 

embeddings show a relatively strong correlation with FWHM (MI = 0 .68) and a moderate 

correlation with RMS roughness (MI = 0.35). 

Since the RHEED embeddings contain 2D information, we computed the 1D direction 

within the embedding space that maximizes MI with the given variable, as illustrated in Figure 3 .

The direction of maximal MI varies across the variable: Ga flux is aligned primarily along the  𝑍 1

axis, while the Se:Ga ratio is rotated by about 60 o along the  𝑍 1 axis and the growth temperature is 

rotated by about 45 o with balanced components along both axes. For scalar quantities, FWHM is 

predominantly oriented along the  𝑍 0 axis, whereas RMS roughness aligns closely with  𝑍 1, nearly 

mirroring the Ga flux direction. This analysis reveals that the 2D RHEED embeddings exhibit 14 

moderate MI with all three growth conditions, with each condition occupying distinct 1D 

directions within the embedding space. The rocking curve FWHM and AFM roughness occupy 

nearly orthogonal directions within the 2D embedding space. Compared to handcrafted scalar 

representations of XRD and AFM data, the unsupervised RHEED representation demonstrates 

stronger correlations with b oth independent and dependent variables. The RHEED embedding 

captures distinct aspects of each variable along nearly orthogonal di rections, providing physical 

significance to the  𝑍 0 and  𝑍 1 axes in the RHEED UMAP (Figure 1 ). 

Figure 2. Pairwise MI between quantities measured in this study. 15 

Figure 3. All quantities shown in the RHEED embedding space : (a) Ga flux, (b) Se:Ga flux ratio, 

(c) growth temperature, (d) FWHM of rocking curves, and (e) RMS roughness of AFM images. 

Red arrows indicate the direction of maximum MI used in Figure 2 . The resulting MI is shown in 

the bottom right of each panel. 

4.3. Supervised Learning. Having established reliable explainability of the latent features 

obtained from different characterization modalities and their correlations with meaningful physical 

features, these latent features can now be used to determine how growth parameters affect the 

sample properties. For this, we trained regression mo dels to predict the scalar quantities (rocking 

curve FWHM and AFM RMS roughness) from the growth conditions. The models were further 

analyzed in the context of anomaly detec tion. Anomalies are samples exhibiting characteristics 

that do not align with the typical growth patterns due to random variations or unknown factors, for 

example, Se flake interference, temperature fluctuations, inaccurate flux measurements, chamber 

conta mination, and unexpected errors with characterizations. Filtering the anomalies out is 

necessary to provide a high -quality sample database for model construction .

4.3.1. Rocking Curve FWHM Prediction. We initiated process modeling using the rocking curve 

FWHM as the target variable, with growth conditions as input features. To evaluate predictive 

performance, we employed Random Forest regression models with LOO CV . Model performance 16 

was primarily assessed using the coefficient of determination ( 𝑅 2 ), also known as explained 

variance. While  𝑅 2 is typically bounded between 0 and 1 in statistical analysis, its computation on 

unseen validation data in predictive modeling can yield negative values. A negative  𝑅 2 indicates 

that the model introduces additional variance beyond the assumption that all samples are 

distributed around the mean, meaning its predictions perform worse than random guessing. 

Note that while the model performance without the LOO procedure (i.e., performance on 

only training data) is  𝑅 2 = 0.83 , this does not accurately portray the expected performance on 

unseen data. Incorporating LOO CV reveals poor predictive performance when all sample data are 

included, as shown in Figure 4a , where the predicted values exhibit higher variance than simply 

assuming the mean (i.e.,  𝑅 2 < 1). To address this, we leveraged the RHEED embeddings to refine 

the dataset by excluding low -quality samples with  𝑍 0 > 1. This refinement resulted in a more 

accurate model ( Figure 4b ), achieving moderate predictive power with  𝑅 2 = 0.55 . The improved 

model performance, which significantly surpasses random guessing, demonstrates a stronger 

alignment with experimental trends, highlighting the effectiveness of RHEED embeddings in 

enhancing model accuracy for MBE process predictions. 17 

Figure 4. Performance of Random Forest Regression models in predicting rocking curve FWHM 

with LOO CV . Since LOO withholds each sample during training , we refer to every prediction as 

part of the model validation set. (a) The parity plot when including all samples in the LOO CV. (b) 

The parity plot when including only samples with RHEED  𝑍 0 < 1 in the LOO CV. 

4.3.2. AFM RMS Roughness Prediction. We repeated the supervised learning procedure for 

predicting AFM RMS roughness. The model achieves  𝑅 2 = 0.94  when evaluated on training data 

without LOO CV , again indicating overfitting and not reflecting its true predictive performance 

on unseen data. After incorporating LOO CV , the full sample set achieves a predictive capability 

of  𝑅 2 = 0.56  (Figure 5a ), notably exceeding the predictive accuracy observed for FWHM under 

similar conditions. Interestingly, excluding samples with  𝑍 0 > 1 does not enhance the roughness 

prediction model; instead, it reduces  𝑅 2 to 0.47 ( Figure 5b ). Using the complete dataset, the 

predictive model for FWHM performed poorly, while the model for RMS roughness showed 

moderate predictive capability. However, after removing low -quality samples identified by the 18 

RHEED embedding, the predictive performance for FWHM improved significantly, whereas the 

accuracy for roughness prediction slightly declined. For this observation, we propose two possible 

explanations: First, developing a predictive model for crystallinity depends more heavily on a 

high -quality sample set than constructing a model for RMS roughness; second, while RHEED is 

generally considered indicative of both crystallinity and surface morphology, our modeling 

suggests that crystallinity variations are the primary driver of changes in RHEED. Specifically, the 

exclusion of low -quality samples based on the RHEED  𝑍 0 component primarily targeted samples 

with abnormal crystallinity, whereas the  𝑍 1 component does not exhibit a clear boundary. It is 

important to emphasize that this does not imply RHEED patterns lack information on surface 

morphology; rather, establishing a robust correlation between RHEED and RMS roughness 

remains a challenge. 

Figure 5. Performance of Random Forest regression models in predicting AFM roughness with 

LOO CV . Since LOO withholds each sample during training, we refer to every prediction as part 19 

of the model validation set. (a) The parity plot when including all samples in the LOO CV. (b) The 

parity plot when including only samples with  𝑍 0 < 1 in the LOO CV .

4.3.3. Anomaly Detection. Providing high -quality and self -consistent data is a critical prerequisite 

for obtaining accurate models; excessively noisy data can only lead to unreliable models that fail 

to generalize well to unseen inputs. Our preceding analysis demonstrates that RHEE D is a 

promising modality for promptly identifying low -quality samples. Experimental observations 

further indicate that these low -quality samples are likely outliers, deviating from the typical growth 

trends established by most experimental data. To valida te this, we selected three such samples and 

repeated the growth using their nominal growth conditions. The resulting samples were noticeably 

different from the originals, confirming that the low qualities of these samples were not inherent 

but rather the r esult of unknown stochastic factors causing anomalous growth behaviors. Details 

of the experiments, along with comparative RHEED, AFM, and rocking curve FWHM data, are 

provided in Figures S 1-S3. In this section, we compared the anomaly detection capability of the 

learned RHEED embeddings to another method based solely on measuring discrepancies between 

similar growth conditions. To this end, we conducted a recursive sample elimination analysis based 

on the  𝑅 2 metric computed in LOO CV for predicting rocking curve FWHM. In each round of the 

procedure, the sample that was least consistent with the rest of the dataset was removed. This was 

defined as the sample whose removal led to the highest LOO  𝑅 2. By removing more samples, the 

model performance generally increased (though not monotonically). The result of this procedure 

is shown in Figure 6a : four of the first five samples removed were from the  𝑍 0 > 1 subset, while 

the remaining Sample #35 lacked RHEED patterns. After removing the five samples, the model 

𝑅 2 rapidly increased from –0.2 to about 0.3. Subsequently, a few samples with  𝑍 0 < 1 were also 

excluded. Upon removing eleven samples, including seven with  𝑍 0 > 1 and three with  𝑍 0 < 1,20 

the  𝑅 2 further improved to around 0.6. Continuing this process only led to a stagnation in 

performance improvement .

Figure 6. (a) Recursive sample elimination based on  𝑅 2 scores in LOO CV evaluation for 

predicting rocking curve FWHM. Samples with  𝑍 0 > 1 and  𝑍 0 < 1 are shown in red and green, 

respectively. The RHEED pattern of Sample #35 (shown in orange) was lost. (b) Model 

performance (validation  𝑅 2 ) when using different subsets of the data.  {𝑅 }𝑁  designates the set 

resulting after the  𝑁 𝑡 ℎ sample removed by the recursive sample elimination (i.e., panel a) while 

{𝑍 0} designates the set of only  𝑍 0 < 1 samples.  {𝑍 0}-#16 designates the additional removal of 

Sample #16, the first non -{𝑍 0} sample to appear in recursive elimination. Colors give a visual 

grouping of similar sets indicated on the  𝑥 -axis but are not derived from data. 

Based on this sample removal procedure, we calculated the LOO  𝑅 2 for a few different 

subsets of the data: some different numbers of samples from the recursive elimination procedure, 

designated with  {𝑅 }𝑁  , and some based on the RHEED  𝑍 0, designated with  {𝑍 0}. We show in 

Figure 6b that the  {𝑍 0} set, representing the removal of nine samples with  𝑍 0 > 1, offers similar 

validation performance compared to the recursive removal procedure. An additional calculation 

was performed on the “ {𝑍 0}-#16” set, where Sample #16, the first non -{𝑍 0} sample, was excluded 21 

in addition to the  𝑍 0 > 1 group. This process only slightly improved performance further 

compared to  {𝑍 0} . Based on this analysis, we concluded that the RHEED UMAP provided 

sufficient anomaly capability, and the recursive elimination of samples that had a deleterious effect 

in LOO CV was not likely to give further improvement to the model performance on unseen data. 

Sample #16, the first non -{𝑍 0 } sample, has a growth temperature of 419 oC, the 97 th 

percentile of that parameter, which had a maximum of 420 oC (Samples #8 and #28 were also 

grown at 419 oC and were excluded by the RHEED  𝑍 0 filter, though Samples #18 and #37 were 

not). This may be the reason that it was selected for removal in the recursive procedure. However, 

removing it only resulted in a slight increase in model performance compared to  𝑍 0 alone and did 

not lead to qualitatively superior predictions. 

4.4.4. Feature Importance. We next evaluated the feature importance within the models trained 

exclusively on the  {𝑍 0} set using drop -column feature importance, where the model is retrained in 

the absence of the dropped feature. Bootstrap sampling with replacement was used to estimate a 

standard error. When an important feature (or “column”) is dropped from the feature sp ace, we 

expect a significant decline in model performance, which confirms that accurate predictions of the 

target variable depend on access to that feature. Conversely, the removal of unimportant or 

redundant features leads to negligible change in performa nce because it is either irrelevant to the 

target variable or its information content can be obtained through analyzing another feature. 

The results for drop -column feature importance on rocking curve FWHM and RMS 

roughness predictive models are presented in Figure 7 . FWHM exhibits a strong dependence on 

Ga flux (as the explained variance drops nearly to zero when Ga flux is removed), and a weaker 

dependence on the Se:Ga ratio, while growth temperature has a negligible effect. In contrast, RMS 

roughness depends somewh at on the Se:Ga ratio (as the explained variance approximately halving 22 

when Se:Ga ratio is dropped), followed by a weaker dependence on Ga flux and minimal impact 

from growth temperature. These findings align with previous MI analysis and are consistent with 

experimental observations. 24 ,41 Our experiment s24 indicate that within the temperature window 

suitable for GaSe crystal growth , variations in temperature do not significantly alter crystallinity. 

Outside of this range, however, amorphous samples are formed. Therefore, we believe that, for 

GaSe growth, while growth temperature plays a crucial role in determining what kind of phase is 

formed, it does not significantly influence the crystallinity of the crystalline samples. This behavior 

may be attributed to the relatively low sublimation temperature of GaSe (i.e., about 500 °C), 74

where higher temperatures tend to cause material loss rather than promote further crystallization. 

Additionally, the interaction between the GaAs substrate and GaSe is relatively strong, reducing 

the sensitivity of crystallinity to substrate temperature in the early growth stages . As for surface 

morphology, we experimentally observed some dependence on substrate temperature; however, 

this effect is less significant and not as sensitive as the influence of the flux ratio. Moreover, t he 

impact of growth temperature on surface morphology appears to be coupled with Ga flux, as 

confirmed by both experimental observations and MI analysis. This interdependence reduces the 

independent predictive importance of growth temperature on surface roughness. 23 

Figure 7. Drop -column feature importance for (a) rocking curve FWHM and (b) RMS roughness 

for Random Forest surrogate models. Performance evaluated with LOO CV. Error bars are the 

standard error from 100 bootstrapped samples with replacement. 

Incorporating the RHEED embeddings in the feature set reveals that RHEED provides 

independent information compared to the Ga flux or Se:Ga ratio alone. As shown in Figure 8 , the 

baseline performance improves slightly compared to Figure 7 , especially for FWHM, while feature 

importance also changes drastically. The FWHM model, instead of relying primarily on Ga flux 

and Se:Ga ratio, now substitutes RHEED  𝑍 0 for Se:Ga as the second most important feature. 

Although other features contribute, their influence is considerably weaker. Note that the FWHM 

model with neither Ga flux nor RHEED  𝑍 0 yields  𝑅 2 = −0.05 , indicating that at least one of 

those two is necessary for accurate predictions. For the AFM roughness model, adding RHEED 

𝑍 1 did not significantly enhance overall performance. However, it took some precedence away 

from the growth conditions, with a less deleterious effect when Ga flux was removed. As in the 

case of the FWHM model, the roughness model without Se:Ga or RHEED  𝑍 1 gives a lower 24 

performance of  𝑅 2 = 0.24  , which matches the performance reported in Figure 7b . The 

improvement suggests that RHEED measurements provide additional information relevant to 

FWHM prediction. 

Figure 8. Drop -column feature importance for (a) rocking curve FWHM and (b) RMS roughness 

for Random Forest surrogate models, including learned RHEED embeddings as features. 

Performance evaluated with LOO CV. Error bars are the standard error from 100 bootstrapped 

samples with replacement. 

5. CONCLUSIONS 

The effectiveness of unsupervised learning on RHEED UMAP embeddings has been demonstrated 

in distinguishing between high - and low -quality samples with a well -defined boundary. Our 

approach successfully captures physically meaningful image features in a man ner comparable to 

human experts. The learned RHEED embeddings exhibit a strong correlation with the crystallinity 

parameter FWHM obtained from ω scans but only a weak correlation with surface RMS roughness. 25 

Additionally, MI analysis reveals that the RHEED embedding s retain more information about 

growth conditions than traditional scalar characterization metrics. 

Among the three key growth parameters, growth rate has the greatest impact on FWHM, 

while the Se:Ga flux ratio primarily affects RMS roughness and the RHEED  𝑍 0 component. 

Growth temperature has a negligible effect on FWHM but slightly influences roughness. Our 

process models show predictive capability for conventional scalar sample features, including 

rocking curve FWHM and AFM RMS roughness. Incorporating in -situ RHEED embeddings 

significantly improves model performance in predicting rocking curve FWHM. Furthermore, 

anomaly detection via residual analysis in supervised learning closely aligns with unsupervised 

learning from in -situ measurements, reinforcing the reliability of the FWHM predictive model and 

cross -validation strategy. 

While the RHEED signals used in our analysis were acquired at the end of sample growth, 

their rapid analysis can accelerate iterative process optimization by avoiding the need for ex situ 

characterization. The high degree of MI between in situ RHEED and ex situ XRD and AFM also 

show that RHEED can be used to corroborate those results . Thus, our findings highlight the 

potential of machine learning -assisted in situ RHEED analysis for enhancing real -time monitoring 

and control in MBE. 

ASSOCIATED CONTENT 

Supporting Information 

The table listing the s ample numbers and growth conditions ; the table listing the machine learning -

derived c haracterization data (FWHM, RMS roughness, and RHEED embedding component  𝑍 ); 

RHEED patterns, AFM images, and rocking curves of Samples #8 and #16 (control group 1) ;26 

RHEED patterns, AFM images, and rocking curves of Samples #28 and #18 (control group 2) ;

RHEED patterns, AFM images, and rocking curves of Samples #34 and #13 (control group 3). 

AUTHOR INFORMATION 

Corresponding Author 

> *

Stephanie Law. E -mail: slaw@psu.edu. 

Author Contributions 

The manuscript was written throug h the contributions of all authors. All authors have given 

approval to the final version of the manuscript. 

Funding Sources 

NSF Cooperative Agreement DMR -2039351. 

Notes 

The authors declare no competing financial interest .

ACKNOWLEDGMENT 

This study is based upon research conducted at the Pennsylvania State University Two -

Dimensional Crystal Consortium —Materials Innovation Platform (2DCC -MIP) , which is 

supported by NSF Cooperative Agreement DMR -2039351 .

ABBREVIATIONS 

MBE , molecular beam epitaxy ; RHEED , reflection high -energy electron diffraction ; XRD , X-ray 

diffraction ; AFM , atomic force microscopy; FWHM, full -width at half maximum; RMS, root -

mean -square; 2D, two -dimensional; vdW, van der Waals; MI, mutual information; UMAP, 27 

uniform manifold approximation and projection; KSG, Kraskov -Stögbauer -Grassberger ; LOO, 

Leave -One -Out; CV, cross -validation;  𝑅 2, coefficient of determination .

REFERENCES 

(1 ) Harris, S. B.; Biswas, A.; Yun, S. J .; Roccapriore , K. M.; Rouleau, C. M.; Puretzky, A. A.; 

Vasudevan, R. K.; Geohegan, D. B.; Xiao, K. Autonomous Synthesis of Thin Film Materials with 

Pulsed Laser Deposition Enabled by In Situ Spectroscopy and Automation . Small Methods 2024 ,

8, 2301763. 

(2) Pyzer -Knapp, E. O.; Pitera, J. W.; Staar, P. W. J.; Takeda, S.; Laino, T.; Sanders, D. P.; Sexton, 

J.; Smith , J. R.; Curioni , A. Accelerating Materials Discovery Using Artificial Intelligence, High 

Performance Computing and Robotics . npj Comput . Mater . 2022 , 8, 84. 

(3) Yoreo, J. de; Mandrus, D.; Soderholm, L.; Forbes, T.; Kanatzidis, M.; Erlebacher, J.; Laskin, 

J.; Wiesner, U.; Xu, T.; Billinge, S.; Tolbert, S.; Zaworotko, M.; Galli, G.; Chan, J.; Mitchell, J.; 

Horton, L.; Kini, A.; Gersten, B.; Maracas, G.; Miranda, R.; Pechan, M.; Runkles, K. Basic 

Research Needs Workshop on Synthesis Science for Energy Relevant Technology . USDOE Office 

of Science (SC) (United States) 2016 .

(4) Jiang, Y.; Salley, D.; Sharma, A.; Keenan, G.; Mullin, M.; Cronin, L. An Artificial Intelligence 

Enabled Chemical Synthesis Robot for Exploration and Optimization of Nanomaterials . Sci. Adv. 

2022 , 8, eabo2626 .

(5) Lei, Y.; Zhang, T.; Lin, Y. -C.; Granzier -Nakajima , T.; Bepete , G.; Kowalczyk , D. A.; Lin, Z.; 

Zhou, D.; Schranghamer , T. F.; Dodda, A.; Sebastian , A.; Chen, Y.; Liu, Y.; Pourtois, G.; Kempa, 

T. J.; Schuler, B.; Edmonds, M. T.; Quek, S. Y.; Wurstbauer , U.; Wu, S. M.; Glavin, N. R.; Das, 

S.; Dash, S. P.; Redwing, J. M.; Robinson, J. A.; Terrones, M. Graphene and Beyond: Recent 28 

Advances in Two -Dimensional Materials Synthesis, Properties, and Devices . ACS Nanosci. Au 

2022 , 2, 450 —485. 

(6) Epps, R. W.; Felton, K. C.; Coley, C. W.; Abolhasani, M. Automated Microfluidic Platform 

for Systematic Studies of Colloidal Perovskite Nanocrystals: Towards Continuous Nano -

Manufacturing . Lap Chip 2017 , 17 , 4040 —4047. 

(7) Volk, A. A.; Epps, R. W.; Yonemoto, D. T.; Masters, B. S.; Castellano, F. N.; Reyes, K. G.; 

Abolhasani, M. AlphaFlow: Autonomous Discovery and Optimization of Multi -Step Chemistry 

Using A Self -Driven Fluidic Lab Guided by Reinforcement Learning . Nat. Commun. 2023 , 14 ,

1403. 

(8) Abolhasani, M.; Kumacheva, E. The Rise of Self -Driving Labs in Chemical and Materials 

Sciences . Nature Synthesis 2023 , 2, 483 —492. 

(9) Tamura, R.; Terayama, K.; Sumita, M.; Tsuda, K. Ranking Pareto Optimal Solutions Based on 

Projection Free Energy . Phys. Rev. Materials 2023 , 7, 093804. 

(10) Pereira, D. A.; Williams, J. A. Origin and Evolution of High Throughput Screening. British 

Journal of Pharmacology 2007 , 152 , 53 —61. 

(11) Macarron, R.; Banks, M. N.; Bojanic, D.; Burns, D. J.; Cirovic, D. A.; Garyantes, T.; Green, 

D. V. S.; Hertzberg, R. P.; Janzen, W. P.; Paslay, J. W.; Schopfer U.; Sittampalam , G. S. Impact 

of High -Throughput Screening in Biomedical Research . Nature Reviews Drug Discovery 2011 ,

10 , 188 —195. 

(12) Nikolaev, P.; Hooper, D.; Perea -López , N.; Terrones, M.; Maruyama, B. Discovery of Wall -

Selective Carbon Nanotube Growth Conditions via Automated Experimentation. ACS Nano 2014 ,

8, 10214 —10222. 29 

(13) Chang, J.; Nikolaev, P.; Carpena -Núñez , J.; Rao, R.; Decker, K.; Islam, A. E.; Kim, J.; Pitt, 

M. A.; Myung, J. I.; Maruyama, B. Efficient Closed -loop Maximization of Carbon Nanotube 

Growth Rate using Bayesian Optimization . Sci. Rep. 2020 , 10 , 9040. 

(14) Nikolaev, P.; Hooper, D.; Webber, F.; Rao, R.; Decker, K.; Krein, M.; Poleski, J.; Barto, R.; 

Maruyama, B. Autonomy in Materials Research: A Case Study in Carbon Nanotube Growth . npj 

Comput . Mater . 2016 , 2, 16031. 

(15) Rajan, A.; Buchberger, S.; Edwards, B.; Zivanovic, A.; Kushwaha, N.; Bigi, C.; Nanao, Y.; 

Saika, B. K.; Armitage, O. R.; Wahl, P.; Couture, P.; King , P. D. C. Epitaxial Growth of Large -

Area Monolayers and van der Waals Heterostructures of Transition -Metal Chalcogenides via 

Assisted Nucleation . Adv. Mater. 2024 , 36 , 2402254. 

(16) Hidayat , W.; Usman, M. Applications of Molecular Beam Epitaxy in Optoelectronic Devices: 

An Overview . Phys. Scr. 2024 , 99 , 112002. 

(17) Nunn, W.; Truttmann, T. K.; Jalan, B. A Review of Molecular -Beam Epitaxy of Wide 

Bandgap Complex Oxide Semiconductors . Journal of Materials Research 2021 , 36 , 4846 —4864. 

(18) Prajapat, P.; Singh, D. K.; Gupta, G. Growth of III -Nitrides by Molecular Beam Epitaxy: 

Unconventional Substrates for Conventional Semiconductors . Materials Science and Engineering: 

B 2023 , 295 , 116574. 

(19) Wang , Z.; Nasir , S.; Bharadwaj , S.; Liu , Y.; Mambakkam , S. V.; Yu , M.; Law, S. Terahertz 

Dirac Hyperbolic Metamaterial . ACS Photonics 2024 , 11 , 4134 —4143. 

(20) He, M.; Matson, J. R.; Yu, M.; Cleri, A.; Sunku, S. S.; Janzen, E.; Mastel, S.; Folland, T. G.; 

Edgar, J. H.; Basov, D. N.; Maria, J. -P.; Law, S.; Caldwell, J. D. Nat. Comm un. 2023 , 14 , 7965. 30 

(21) Ohkubo, I.; Hou, Z.; Lee, J. N.; Aizawa, T.; Lippmaa, M.; Chikyow, T.; Tsuda, K.; Mori, T. 

Realization of Closed -Loop Optimization of Epitaxial Titanium Nitride Thin -Film Growth via 

Machine Learning . Materials Today Physics 2021 , 16 , 100296. 

(22) Price, C. C.; Li, Y.; Zhou, G.; Younas, R.; Zeng, S. S.; Scanlon, T. H.; Munro, J. M.; Hinkle, 

C. L. Predicting and Accelerating Nanomaterial Synthesis Using Machine Learning Featurization. 

Nano Lett. 2024 , 24 , 14862 —14867. 

(23 ) Yu, M.; Wang, J.; Iddawela, S. A.; McDonough, M.; Thompson, J. L.; Sinnott, S. B.; Hickey, 

D. R.; Law, S. Treatment and Aging Studies of GaAs(111)B Substrates for van der Waals 

Chalcogenide Film Growth . J. Vac. Sci. Technol. B 2024 , 42 , 033201. 

(24 ) Yu, M.; Iddawela S. A.; Wang, J.; Hilse, M.; Thompson, J. L.; Hickey, D. R.; Sinnott, S. B.; 

Law, S. Quasi -Van der Waals Epitaxial Growth of γ’ -GaSe Nanometer -Thick Films on 

GaAs(111)B Substrates. ACS Nano 2024 , 18 , 17185 —17196. 

(25 ) Lim, S. Y.; Lee, J. -U.; Kim, J. H.; Liang, L.; Kong, X.; Nguyen, T. T. H.; Lee, Z.; Cho, S.; 

Cheong, H. Polytypism in Few -Layer Gallium Selenide . Nanoscale 2020 , 12 , 8563 —8573. 

(26 ) Allakhverdiev, K. R. ; Yetis, M. Ö. ; Özbek, S. ; Baykara , T. K. ; Salaev , E. Yu. Effective 

Nonlinear GaSe Crystal. Optical Properties and Applications . Laser Phys. 2009 , 19 , 1092 —1104. 

(27 ) Shi, W.; Ding, Y. J.; Fernelius, N.; Vodopyanov , K. Efficient, Tunable, and Coherent 0.18 –

5.27 -THz Source Based on GaSe Crystal . Opt. Lett. 2002 , 27 , 1454 —145 6. 

(28 ) Plucinski, L.; Johnson, R. L. Electronic Band Structure of GaSe(0001): Angle -Resolved 

Photoemission and ab initio Theory . Phys. Rev. B 2003 , 68 , 125304 .

(29 ) Jung, C. S.; Shojaei, F.; Park, K.; Oh, J. Y.; Im, H. S.; Jang, D. M.; Park, J.; Kang, H. S. Red -

to -Ultraviolet Emission Tuning of Two -Dimensional Gallium Sulfide/Selenide . ACS Nano 2015 ,

9, 9585 —9593. 31 

(30 ) Zhou, Y.; Nie, Y.; Liu , Y.; Yan, K.; Hong, J.; Jin, C.; Zhou, Y.; Yin, J.; Liu, Z.; Peng, H. 

Epitaxy and Photoresponse of Two -Dimensional GaSe Crystals on Flexible Transparent Mica 

Sheets . ACS Nano 2014 , 8, 1485 —1490. 

(31 ) Xu, K.; Yin, L.; Huang, Y.; Shifa, T. A.; Chu, J.; Wang, F.; Cheng, R.; Wang, Z.; He, J. 

Synthesis, Properties and Applications of 2D Layered M III XVI (M = Ga, In; X = S, Se, Te) 

Materials . Nanoscale 2016 , 8, 16802 —16818. 

(32 ) Late, D. J.; Liu, B.; Matte, H. S. S. R.; Rao, C. N. R.; Dravid, V. P. Rapid Characterization of 

Ultrathin Layers of Chalcogenides on SiO 2/Si Substrates . Adv. Funct. Mater. 2012 , 22 , 1894 —

1905. 

(33 ) Cao, Y.; Cai, K.; Hu, P.; Zhao, L.; Yan, T.; Luo, W.; Zhang, X.; Wu, X.; Wang, K.; Zheng, 

H. Strong Enhancement of Photoresponsivity with Shrinking the Electrodes Spacing in Few Layer 

GaSe Photodetectors . Sci. Rep. 2015 , 5, 8130. 

(34 ) Kübler , C.; Huber , R.; Tübel , S.; Leitenstorfer A. Ultrabroadband Detection of Multi -

Terahertz Field Transients with GaSe Electro -Optic Sensors: Approaching the Near Infrared . Appl. 

Phys. Lett. 2004 , 85 , 3360 —3362. 

(35 ) Hu, P.; Wen, Z.; Wang, L.; Tan, P.; Xiao, K. Synthesis of Few -Layer GaSe Nanosheets for 

High Performance Photodetectors . ACS Nano 2012 , 6, 5988 —5994 .

(36 ) Tiwari, A.; Syväjärvi , M. Advanced 2D Materials. In Two -Dimensional Layered Gallium 

Selenide: Preparation, Properties, and Applications; Jie, W.; Hao, J.; Eds.; Wiley: Beverly, MA, 

USA, 2016 ; pp 3 —35. 

(37 ) Müller , D.; Jiang , E.; Rivas -Lazaro , P.; Baretzky , C.; Loukeris, G.; Bogati, S.; Paetel, S.; 

Irvine, S. J. C.; Oklobia, O.; Jones, S.; Lamb, D.; Richter, A.; Siefer, G.; Lackner, D.; Helmers, 

H.; Teixeira, C.; Forgács , D.; Freitag, M.; Bradford, D.; Shen, Z.; Zimmermann, B.; Würfel , U. 32 

Indoor Photovoltaics for the Internet -of -Things – A Comparison of State -of -the -Art Devices from 

Different Photovoltaic Technologies . ACS Appl. Energy Mater. 2023 , 6, 10404 —10414. 

(38 ) Yu, M.; Hilse, M.; Zhang, Q.; Liu, Y.; Wang, Z.; Law, S. Review of Nanolayered Post -

transition Metal Monochalcogenides: Synthesis, Properties, and Applications . ACS Appl. Nano 

Mater. 2024 , 7, 28008 —28026. 

(39 ) Cai, H.; Gu, Y.; Lin, Y. -C.; Yu, Y.; Geohegan, D. B.; Xiao, K. Synthesis and Emerging 

Properties of 2D Layered III –VI Metal Chalcogenides . Appl. Phys. Rev. 2019 , 6, 041312. 

(40 ) Klein, A.; Jaegermann, W. Review —Electronic Properties of 2D Layered Chalcogenide 

Surfaces and Interfaces Grown by ( Quasi) van der Waals Epitaxy . ECS J. Solid State Sci. Technol. 

2020 , 9, 093012. 

(41 ) Yu, M.; Murray, L.; Doty, M.; Law, S. Epitaxial Growth of Atomically Thin Ga 2Se 2 Films 

on C-Plane Sapphire Substrates . J. Vac. Sci. Technol. A 2023 , 41 , 032704. 

(42 ) Grzonka, J.; Claro, M. S.; Molina -Sánchez , A.; Sadewasser, S.; Ferreira , P. J. Novel 

Polymorph of GaSe . Adv. Funct. Mater. 2021 , 31 , 2104965. 

(43 ) Yuan, X.; Tang, L.; Liu, S.; Wang, P.; Chen, Z.; Zhang, C.; Liu, Y.; Wang, W.; Zou, Y.; Liu, 

C.; Guo, N.; Zou, J.; Zhou, P.; Hu, W.; Xiu, F. Arrayed van der Waals Vertical Heterostructures 

Based on 2D GaSe Grown by Molecular Beam Epitaxy . Nano Lett. 2015 , 15 , 3571 —3577. 

(44 ) Lee, C. H.; Krishnamoorthy , S.; O’Hara , D. J.; Brenner, M. R.; Johnson, J. M.; Jamison, J. S.; 

Myers, R. K.; Hwang, J.; Rajan, S. Molecular Beam Epitaxy of 2D -layered Gallium Selenide on 

GaN Substrates . J. Appl. Phys. 2017 , 121 , 094302. 

(4 5) Kojima , N.; Sato, K.; Yamada, A.; Konagai, M.; Takahashi, K. T. K. Epitaxial Growth of 

GaSe Films by Molecular Beam Epitaxy on GaAs(111), (001) and (112) Substrates . Jpn. J. Appl. 

Phys. 1994 , 33 , L1482. 33 

(4 6) Shiffa, M.; Dewes, B . T. ; Bradford, J.; Cottam, N. D.; Cheng, T. S.; Mellor, C. J.; 

Makarovskiy, O.; Rahman, K.; O’Shea, J. N.; Beton, P. H.; Novikov, S. V.; Ben, T.; Gonzalez, D.; 

Xie, J.; Zhang, L.; Patanè , A. Wafer -Scale Two -Dimensional Semiconductors for Deep UV 

Sensing . Small 2024 , 20 , 2305865. 

(4 7) Bradford, J. ; Dewes, B. T. ; Shiffa, M. ; Cottam, N. D. ; Rahman, K. ; Cheng, T. S. ; Novikov, 

S. V. ; Makarovsky, O. ; O’Shea, J. N. ; Beton, P. H. ; Lara -Avila, S. ; Harknett, J. ; Greenaway, M. 

T. ; Patanè, A. Epitaxy of GaSe Coupled to Graphene: From In Situ Band Engineering to Photon 

Sensing. Small 2024 , 20 , 2404809. 

(4 8) Kim, C. K.; Drozdov, I. K.; Fujita, K.; Davis, J. C. S.; Božović , I.; Valla, T. In -Situ Angle -

Resolved Photoemission Spectroscopy of Copper -Oxide Thin Films Synthesized by Molecular 

Beam Epitaxy . Journal of Electron Spectroscopy and Related Phenomena 2022 , 257 , 146775. 

(49 ) Furuya, D.; Miyashita, T.; Miura, Y.; Iwasaki, Y.; Kotsugi, M. Autonomous Synthesis System 

Integrating Theoretical, Informatics, and Experimental Approaches for Large -Magnetic -

Anisotropy Materials . Science and Technology of Advanced Materials: Methods 2022 , 2, 280 —

293. 

(50 ) Lin , Y. -C.; Liu , C.; Yu , Y.; Zarkadoula , E.; Yoon , M.; Puretzky , A. A.; Liang , L.; Kong , X.; 

Gu , Y.; Strasser , A.; Meyer III , H. M.; Lorenz , M.; Chisholm , M. F.; Ivanov , I. N.; Rouleau , C. 

M.; Duscher , G.; Xiao , K.; Geohegan , D. B. Low Energy Implantation into Transition -Metal 

Dichalcogenide Monolayers to Form Janus Structures . ACS Nano 2020 , 14 , 3896 —3906. 

(51 ) Harris, S. B.; Lin, Y. -C.; Puretzky, A. A.; Liang, L.; Dyck, O.; Berlijn , T.; Eres, G.; Rouleau, 

C. M.; Xiao, K.; Geohegan, D. B. Real -Time Diagnostics of 2D Crystal Transformations by Pulsed 

Laser Deposition: Controlled Synthesis of Janus WSSe Monolayers and Alloys . ACS Nano 2023 ,

17 , 2472 —2486. 34 

(52) Provence, S. R.; Thapa, S.; Paudel, R.; Truttmann, T. K.; Prakash, A.; Jalan, B.; Comes, R. 

B. Machine Learning Analysis of Perovskite Oxides Grown by Molecular Beam Epitaxy. Phys. 

Rev. Mater. 2020 , 4, 083807. 

(53) Kwoen, J.; Arakawa, Y. Classification of Reflection High -Energy Electron Diffraction Pattern 

Using Machine Learning. Cryst. Growth Des. 2020 , 20 , 5289 —5293. 

(54) Kim , H. J.; Chong, M.; Rhee, T. G.; Khim, Y. G.; Jung, M. -H.; Kim, Y. -M.; Jeong, H. Y.; 

Choi, B. K.; Chang, Y. J. Machine -Learning -Assisted Analysis of Transition Metal 

Dichalcogenide Thin -Film Growth. Nano Convergence 2023 , 10 , 10. 

(55) Liang, H.; Stanev, V.; Kusne, A. G.; Tsukahara, Y.; Ito, K.; Takahashi, R.; Lippmaa, M.; 

Takeuchi, I. Application of Machine Learning to Reflection High -Energy Electron Diffraction 

Images for Automated Structural Phase Mapping. Phys. Rev. Mater. 2022 , 6, 063805. 

(56) Huang, B.; Li, Z.; Li, J. An Artificial Intelligence Atomic F orce Microscope Enabled by 

Machine Learning. Nanoscale 2018 , 10 , 21320 —21326. 

(57) Sokolov, I. On Machine Learning Analysis of Atomic Force Microscopy Images for Image 

Classification, Sample Surface Recognition. Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys. 2024 , 26 , 11263 —11270. 

(58) Masud, N.; Rade, J.; Hasibul Hasan Hasib, M.; Krishnamurthy, A.; Sarkar, A. Machine 

Learning Approaches for Improving Atomic Force Microscopy Instrumentation and Data 

Analytics. Front. Phys. 2024 , 12. 

(59) Surdu, V. -A.; Győrgy , R. X -Ray Diffraction Data Analysis by Machine Learning Methods —

A Review. Appl. Sci. 2023 , 13 (17) , 9992. 

(60) Spring Thorpe, A. J.; Ingrey, S. J.; Emmerstorfer, B.; Mandeville, P.; Moore, W. T. 

Measurement of GaAs Surface Oxide Desorption Temperatures. Appl. Phys. Lett. 1987 , 50 , 77 —

79. 35 

(61) Kaspari, C.; Pristovsek M.; Richter W. Deoxidation of (001) III -V Semiconductors in Metal -

Organic Vapour Phase Epitaxy. J. Appl. Phys. 2016 , 120 , 085701. 

(62 ) Wang, G.; Lu, T. RHEED Transmission Mode and Pole Figures; Springer, New York, 2014 ;

chapter 6, pp 76 —82. 

(63) Trejo -Hernández , R.; Casallas -Moreno, Y. L.; Gallardo -Hernández , S.; López -López , M. 

Crystalline Phase Purity and Twinning of Mg -Doped Zincblende GaN Thin Films . Appl. Surf. Sci. 

2023 , 636 , 157667. 

(64) Jo, J.; Tchoe, Y.; Yi, G. -C.; Kim, M. Real -Time Characterization Using in situ RHEED 

Transmission Mode and TEM for Investigation of the Growth Behaviour of Nanomaterials . Sci. 

Rep. 2018 , 8, 1694. 

(65) Yu, M. ; Reinhart, W. ; Law, S. Multi -modal machine learning analysis of GaSe growth 

conditions [Data set] . Scholarsphere 2024 , https://doi.org/10.26207/9y6b -0676 

(66) Mclnnes, L.; Healy, J.; Melville, J. UMAP: Uniform Manifold Approximation and Projection 

for Dimension Reduction. 2020 , arXiv:1802.03426 

(67) Pearson, K. LIII. On lines and planes of closest fit to systems of points in space . The London, 

Edinburgh, and Dublin Philosophical Magazine and Journal of Science 1901 , 2 (11) , 559 –572 .

(68) Lee, D. D.; Seung, H. S. Algorithms for non -negative matrix factorization . Proceedings of the 

14 th International Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems. MIT Press, Cambridge, 

MA, USA, 2000 . pp 535 —541. 

(69) Shannon , C. E. A mathematical theory of communication . Bell System Technical Journal 

1948 , 27 , 379 —423. 

(70 ) Kraskov, A.; Stögbauer , H.; Grassberger, P. Estimating Mutual Information. Phys. Rev. E 

2004 , 69 , 066138. 36 

(7 1) Breiman, L. Random Forests. Machine Learning 2001 , 45 , 5 —32 .

(7 2) Pedregosa, F.; Varoquaux, G.; Gramfort, A.; Michel, V.; Thirion, B.; Grisel, O.; Blondel, M.; 

Müller, A.; Nothman, J.; Louppe, G.; Prettenhofer, P.; Weiss, R.; Dubourg, V.; Vanderplas, J.; 

Passos, A.; Cournapeau, D.; Brucher, M.; Perrot, M.; Duchesnay , É. Scikit -learn: Machine 

Learning in Python . 2018 , arXiv:1201.0490 

(73) Yu, M. ; Moses, I. A. ; Reinhart, W. ; Law, S. Data and code for multi -modal machine learning 

analysis of GaSe growth conditions [Data set]. Zenodo 2025 ,

https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.14834217 

(74) Chegwidden, S.; Dai, Z.; Olmstead, M. A.; Ohuchi, F. S. Molecular Beam Epitaxy and 

Interface Reactions of Layered GaSe Growth on Sapphire (0001). J. Vac. Sci. Technol. A 1998 , 16 ,

2376 —2380. 

Table of Contents (TOC) Figure 37 

Supporting Information 

# Multi -modal machine learning analysis of GaSe 

# molecular beam epitaxy growth conditions 

Mingyu Yu, † Isaiah A. Moses, ‡ Wesley F. Reinhart, §, 

> ‖

Stephanie Law *, §

> †

Department of Materials Science and Engineering, University of Delaware, Newark, Delaware 

19716, United States 

> ‡

Materials Research Institute, Pennsy lvania State University, University Park, Pennsylvania 

16827, United States 

> §

Department of Materials Science and Engineering, Pennsylvania State University, University 

Park, Pennsylvania 16827, United States 

> ‖

Institute for Computational and Data Science, Pennsylvania State University, University Park, 

Pennsylvania 16827, United States 

> *

Corresponding author: Stephanie Law 

E-mail: slaw@psu.edu 38 

Table S1. Growth conditions of 37 GaSe film samples grown on GaAs (111)B substrates. Sample 

# is the sample number used in the main text. LiST # is the original sample number in the LiST 

database. Fluxes were measured by quartz crystal microbalance. Growth temperatures were 

measured by a thermocouple. Raw data on LiST can be found in Ref. 1.

Sample # LiST # Ga flux 

[×10 13 atoms cm -2 s-1]

Se:Ga flux ratio  Growth temp. 

[oC] 

1 240221B  1.91 00 ± 0.01 00  2.825 ± 0.015  410 

2 240309A  1.95 00 ± 0.01 00  1.84 0 ± 0.01 0 410 

3 240405A  0.4975 ± 0.0095  1.705 ± 0.035  400 

4 240604A  1.075 0 ± 0.005 0 2.40 0 ± 0.02 0 414 

5 240405B  0.538 0 ± 0.01 00  1.58 0 ± 0.03 0 385 

6 240306A  2.01 00 ± 0.01 00  2.33 0 ± 0.01 0 410 

7 240430A  2.83 00 ± 0.01 00  1.22 0 401 

8 240525C  2.19 00 ± 0.01 00  3.335 ± 0.015  419 

9 240221A  1.91 00 ± 0.01 00  1.31 0 ± 0.01 0 410 

10  240617B  1.45 00 ± 0.01 00  4.38 0 ± 0.03 0 404 

11  240306B  1.06 00 ± 0.01 00  2.795 ± 0.025  400 

12  240616B  1.89 00 ± 0.01 00  3.965 ± 0.015  385 

13  240608B  0.8575 ± 0.0095  2.73 0 ± 0.03 0 395 

14  240426A  2.33 00 ± 0.01 00  2.215 ± 0.005  390 

15  240221C  1.91 00 ± 0.01 00  4.92 0 ± 0.02 0 410 

16  240604B  2.13 00 ± 0.01 00  3.605 ± 0.015  419 

17  240402B  2.11 00 ± 0.01 00  1.435 ± 0.005  410 

18  240608C  0.9765 ± 0.0095  3.195 ± 0.035  419 

19  240424A  1.75 00  2.18 0 416 39 

20  240616A  0.5775 ± 0.0095  4.505 ± 0.075  371 

21  240430B  4.005 0 ± 0.005 0 1.535 ± 0.005  359 

22  240501B  4.345 0 ± 0.005 0 2.175 ± 0.005  418 

23  240525B  1.135 0 ± 0.005 0 2.275 ± 0.015  414 

24  240314C  1.45 00  5.2 00  383 

25  240501A  2.65 00 ± 0.01 00  2.075 ± 0.005  374 

26  240604C  3.985 0 ± 0.005 0 1.565 ± 0.005  359 

27  240608A  0.777 0 ± 0.010 0 1.47 0 ± 0.02 0 402 

28  240525A  0.937 0 ± 0.009 0 3.09 0 ± 0.03 0 419 

29  240426B  5.955 0 ± 0.005 0 2.18 0 399 

30  240617A  1.395 0 ± 0.005 0 2.54 0 ± 0.02 0 375 

31  240424B  4.8 000  2.51 0 366 

32  240402C  2.11 00 ± 0.01 00  1.435 ± 0.005  390 

33  240402D  2.13 00 ± 0.01 00  1.42 0 ± 0.01 0 400 

34  240521B  0.8575 ± 0.0095  2.69 0 ± 0.03 0 395 

35  240521A  0.797 0 ± 0.009 0 1.53 0 ± 0.02 0 402 

36  240422A  3.425 0 ± 0.005 0 3.77 0 ± 0.01 0 353 

37  240422B  4.70 00 ± 0.01 00  3.825 ± 0.005  420 40 

Table S2. Characterization results of 37 GaSe film samples. Sample # and LiST # are the sample 

number s used in the main text and the LiST database, respectively . FWHM refers to the full -width 

at half maximum of a rocking curve obtained from high -resolution X -ray diffraction ω scan. The 

RMS (root -mean -square) roughness was calculated from atomic force microscopy (AFM) scans 

over a 1 cm × 1 cm area. RHEED  𝑍 0 and  𝑍 1 are the components of reflection high -energy electron 

diffraction embeddings and they have no physical units. RHEED patterns of Samples #24 and #35 

were lost due to technical issues. Raw data on LiST can be found in Ref. 1. Processed data and 

code can be found in Ref. 2. Uncertainty in FWHM and RMS roughness are estimated by the mean 

absolute deviation when repeating analysis of the same samples .

Sampl e # LiST # FWHM 

[ 0.0 86 o]

RMS roughness 

[ 0.0 67 nm ]

RHEED Z 0

[a.u.] 

RHEED Z 1

[a.u.] 

1 240221B  2.25  0.92  -1.11  -0.49 

2 240309A  3.65  0.99  -0.32  -0.57 

3 240405A  2.12  0.86  -0.63  -2.68 

4 240604A  3.61  2.00  -0.16  -2.12 

5 240405B  2.42  0.92  -0.58  -0.23 

6 240306A  2.61  1.31  -1.26  -0.62 

7 240430A  7.99  1.19  0.75  -0.35 

8 240525C  7.23  1.91  1.51  -2.0 

9 240221A  3.91  0.91  0.14  -0.76 

10  240617B  6.58  3.66  1.72  -1.03 

11  240306B  2.81  2.14  -1.28  -1.44 

12  240616B  5.73  2.94  1.5  -1.39 

13  240608B  2.96  2.09  -0.49  -2.43 

14  240426A  5.97  1.25  0.65  -2.86 41 

15  240221C  1.95  1.73  -1.23  -1.90 

16  240604B  4.03  2.54  -0.82  -1.54 

17  240402B  4.18  0.88  -0.52  0.09 

18  240608C  3.29  3.04  -0.69  -2.03 

19  240424A  3.33  1.08  -0.97  -0.94 

20  240616A  5.67  2.96  1.26  -0.74 

21  240430B  7.33  0.93  0.49  -1.33 

22  240501B  4.98  1.11  -0.57  -0.96 

23  240525B  4.67  2.35  0.30  -2.00 

24  240314C  3.65  3.06  -- --

25  240501A  5.23  0.92  0.12  -1.57 

26  240604C  5.60  0.77  0.58  -2.41 

27  240608A  3.45  0.99  0.14  -2.47 

28  240525A  7.35  2.66  1.28  -2.45 

29  240426B  4.11  0.81  0.40  -3.08 

30  240617A  7.46  1.28  1.88  -2.29 

31  240424B  10.92  1.19  2.17  -1.89 

32  240402C  4.28  0.97  -0.02  -0.08 

33  240402D  5.98  0.96  0.29  0.10 

34  240521B  10.15  1.72  1.79  -1.85 

35  240521A  5.81  1.35  -- --

36  240422A  5.26  2.91  1.97  -1.28 

37  240422B  4.08  1.44  0.10  -2.84 42 

Figure S 1. Control group 1: Sample #8 (anomalous) and Sample #16 (normal). RHEED patterns 

recorded along the GaSe  [11̅00 ] direction for Sample #8 (a) and Sample #16 (b). AFM images of 

Sample #8 (c) and Sample #16 (d). Rocking curves of Samples #8 and #16 (e). Both samples were 

grown under the same nominal conditions but on different dates (see Table S1 for details). 43 

Figure S 2. Control group 2: Sample #28 (anomalous) and Sample #18 (normal). RHEED patterns 

recorded along the GaSe  [11̅00 ] direction for Sample #28 (a) and Sample #18 (b). AFM images 

of Sample #28 (c) and Sample #18 (d). Rocking curves of Samples #28 and #18 (e). Both samples 

were grown under the same nominal conditions but on different dates (see Table S1 for details). 44 

Figure S 3. Control group 3: Sample #34 (anomalous) and Sample #13 (normal). RHEED patterns 

recorded along the GaSe  [11̅00 ] direction for Sample #34 (a) and Sample #13 (b). AFM images 

of Sample #34 (c) and Sample #13 (d). Rocking curves of Samples #34 and #13 (e). Both samples 

were grown under the same nominal conditions but on different dates (see Table S1 for details). 45 

REFERENCES 

(1 ) Yu, M.; Reinhart, W.; Law, S. Multi -modal machine learning analysis of GaSe growth 

conditions [Data set]. Scholarsphere 2024 , https://doi.org/10.26207/9y6b -0676 .

(2) Yu, M. ; Moses, I. A. ; Reinhart, W. ; Law, S. Data and code for multi -modal machine learning 

analysis of GaSe growth conditions [Data set]. Zenodo 2025 ,

https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.14834217