Title: 2609.02209v1.pdf

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2609.02209v1

Published Time: Thu, 03 Sep 2026 00:40:53 GMT

Number of Pages: 79

Markdown Content:
1

# Prototype -guided transfer of sparse literature knowledge 

# for electrolyte additive discovery 

Weixiang HONG 1,5, Hongting DU 1,5, Jiayue TANG 1, Ruifeng TAN 1, Yangjian QUAN 2,

Jia LI 3,* , Jiaqiang HUANG 1,4,*  

> 1

Sustainable Energy and Environment Thrust  and  Guangzhou Municipal Key Laboratory of 

Materials Informatics, The Hong Kong University of  Science and Technology (Guangzhou), 

Nansha, Guangzhou, 511400,  Guangdong, P.R. China  

> 2

Department of Chemistry, The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology, Clear Water Bay, 

Kowloon, Hong Kong SAR, P.R. China  

> 3

Data Science and Analytics Thrust  and  Guangzhou Municipal Key Laboratory of Materials 

Informatics, The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology (Guangzhou), Nansha, 

Guangzhou, 511400, Guangdong, P.R. China  

> 4

Academy of Interdisciplinary Studies, The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology, Clear 

Water Bay, Kowloon,  Hong Kong SAR, P.R. China  

> 5

These authors contributed equally: Weixiang HONG, Hongting DU 

* Corresponding author s:

J. Huang:  seejhuang@ hkust -gz.edu.cn 

J. Li:  jialee@ hkust -gz.edu.cn 2

## Abstract 

Electrolyte additive discovery remains challenging because experimentally validated 

molecules are sparse, whereas accessible chemical spaces are vast and largely 

unlabeled.  This challenge is amplified in lithium -ion batteries, where additive 

performance arises from coupled interfacial reactions rather than a single molecular 

property.  Here, we  develop  a prototype -guided molecular intelligence, ProtoMI, a 

literature -driven framework that learns transferable structural priors from reported 

electrolyte additives and uses them to prioritize candidates in unlabeled chemical 

space.  For boron -containing additives, ProtoMI  combines 126 literature -reported 

molecules with 179,977 unlabeled candidates. Graph contrastive learning identifies 

seven chemically interpretable prototypes from the reported additives, and prototype -

guided semi -supervised contrastive learning adapts the se prototypes to the candidate 

space under source -target distribution mismatch.  In retrospective temporal validation, 

ProtoMI achieves enrichment factors of 9.2 -45.6 while screening less than 2% of the 

candidate space. A subsequent translation step identifies four commercially accessible 

candidates.  One representative candidate,  4,4,5,5 -Tetramethyl -2-[10 -(1 -

naphthyl)anthracen -9-yl] -1,3,2 -dioxaborolane (TNDB) , improves high -temperature 

LiFePO 4||graphite cycling at 55 °C by  34.93%  relative to the baseline electrolyte.  An 

arsenal of characterizations and  operando  optical fiber  Fourier  transform  infrared 

spectroscopy  suggest that TNDB forms B-containing,  F/P/O -modified inorganic 

interphases , suppresses solvent decomposition and reduces Fe deposition on 

graphite. This case study shows how sparse literature knowledge can guide 

experimentally efficient molecular discovery in data -scarce battery -additive spaces. 

## Introduction 

Lithium -ion batteries (LIBs) underpin electrified transport, grid storage and portable 

electronics, and their deployment is expected to expand substantially as electrification 

accelerates 1,2 . As LIBs are pushed toward longer lifetimes, higher power operation and 

harsher operating environments,  battery degradation  is increasingly governed by the 

stability of electrochemical interfaces, where electrolyte decomposition, interphase 

evolution and transition -metal crossover can trigger coupled degradation processes 3-

> 5

. Electrolyte additives provide a practical and manufacturable route to regulate such 

interfaces. Even at low concentrations, additives can alter solvation structures, 

undergo preferential interfacial reactions, scavenge reactive impurities and promote 

stabi lizing solid -electrolyte interphase (SEI) and cathode -electrolyte interphase (CEI) 6.

However, additive discovery remains largely empirical because additive efficacy 

emerges from the coupled effects of molecular stability, salt -solvent coordination, ion 3

transport, decomposition pathways and interphase growth, none of which can be 

reliably captured by a single molecular descriptor 3-6.

Recent advances in artificial intelligence (AI), molecular representation learning 

and data -driven optimization have accelerated the exploration of high -dimensional 

chemical spaces 7,8 . In battery -electrolyte research, data -driven strategies have been 

used 9 to predict molecular and electrolyte properties 10 , screen electrolyte 

components 11  with theoretical calculations 12 -16  or curated datasets 17,18 , and guide 

electrolyte optimization workflows 18 -20 . Active -learning approaches have further 

reduced experimental burden by iteratively updating models with new 

measurements 20 , while physics -informed and solvation -aware models have 

introduced thermodynamic, transport and molecular -interaction constraints into 

electrolyte design 21,22 . These studies have demonstrated the value of data -driven 

electrolyte discovery. Nevertheless, most existing approaches are formulated around 

supervised prediction or iterative optimization once target labels, simulation outputs or 

experimental feedback are  available. This creates a mismatch for electrolyte additive 

discovery, where experimentally validated molecules are sparse, literature reports are 

heterogeneous and most accessible candidate molecules have no measured battery -

relevant labels. 

Under such severe label scarcity, the central challenge shifts from predicting the 

performance of individual molecules to prioritizing chemically promising regions of an 

unlabeled molecular space under limited experimental budgets.  Reported electrolyte 

additives are not merely isolated successful examples . Instead,  they may encode 

recurring structural organization and shared interfacial regulation strategies 6, including 

anion reception 23 , reactive -species scavenging 24 , solvation regulation 25  and 

interphase construction 24,26 . If these recurring patterns can be learned as prototype -

level priors rather than as molecule -level labels, they may guide exploration beyond 

the local neighborhoods of known additives.  Representation learning provides a route 

to extract structured molecular embeddings from sparse data 27 , while prototype -based 

alignment 28,29  and semi -supervised learning 30  offer mechanisms to transfer such 

organization into unlabeled domains . Together, these advances suggest an alternative 

discovery paradigm: instead of directly predicting additive performance from scarce 

labels, sparse literature -derived success patterns can be converted into transferable 

molecular prototypes that guide effici ent candidate selection  (Fig. 1a,b ).

Here we develop prototype -guided molecular intelligence (ProtoMI), a literature -4

driven framework for molecular discovery under sparse positive knowledge and large 

unlabeled candidate spaces. ProtoMI treats reported additives as a positive molecular 

knowledge source rather than as a conventional supervised training set. The 

framework p roceeds through three stages  (Fig. 1 c). First, literature -reported additive 

molecules are extracted and curated to construct a positive molecular dataset,  and the 

unsupervised graph contrastive learning is used to identify prototype -level chemical 

organization within the reported additives.  Second , prototype -guided semi -supervised 

contrastive learning adapts these prototypes to a large unlabeled molecular space 

under source -target distribution mismatch.  Third, a  subsequent knowledge -guided 

translation step incorporates chemical feasibility and experimental accessibility 

constraints to convert model recommendations into testable candidates. 

As a case study, we focus on boron -containing electrolyte additives.  Boron -

containing additives provide a suitable testbed because their Lewis -acidic and 

borate/boronate chemistries are well documented in electrolyte interphase regulation, 

yet remain sparsely explored across the broader boron -containing chemical space 23 -

> 26

. This combination of established chemical relevance and large unexplored 

molecular diversity creates a stringent test for ProtoMI : whether sparse literature -

reported successes can be transformed into transferable prototype priors for efficient 

candidate selection. In this work, ProtoMI integrates 126 literature -reported boron -

containing additives with 179,977 unlabeled boron -contain ing candidates from 

PubChem 31 . Retrospective temporal validation shows that the framework recovers 

future -reported additives with enrichment factors of 9.2 -45.6 while screening less than 

2% of the candidate space. A knowledge -guided translation  step  further prioritizes four 

commercially accessible candidates for high -temperature LiFePO 4||graphite cells, a 

system in which elevated -temperature cycling stability remains an important practical 

challenge 32,33 . One representative candidate, 4,4,5,5 -tetramethyl -2-[10 -(1 -

naphthyl)anthracen -9-yl] -1,3,2 -dioxaborolane (TNDB), improves capacity retention by 

34.93%  relative to the baseline electrolyte during cycling at 55 °C. Post -mortem and 

operando characterizations indicate that TNDB participates in forming B -containing, 

F/P/O -modified  interphases that suppress solvent decomposition and reduce Fe 

deposition on graphite. These results demonstrate that sparse literature -derived 

molecular successes can be transformed into transferable prototype priors for efficient 

electrolyte additive disc overy under severe data scarcity. 5

Fig. 1 |  Overview of the ProtoMI framework for prototype -guided discovery of boron -containing 

electrolyte additives . a ,b, Conceptual comparison between traditional molecular exploration and 

prototype -guided exploration.  Conventional  exploration ( a) searches the molecular space largely 

through local trial -and -error optimization, whereas prototype -guided exploration ( b) first identifies 

representative prototype regions from reported additives and subsequently explores structurally distinct 

regions of the molecular landscape through prototype -level knowledge transfer . c, Overview of the 

ProtoMI molecular discovery workflow . Experimentally reported boron -containing additives are first 

collected from the literature using a large -language -model -assisted data -mining pipeline to construct a 

curated molecular dataset.  An unsupervised  graph  contrastive learning model then extracts prototype -

level chemical knowledge from reported additives. These prototypes are transferred to a large unlabeled 

molecular space by prototype -guided semi -supervised contrastive learning, yielding adapted prototype 

regions and recommended candidates. A knowledge -guided translation  step  further incorporates 

chemical feasibility and practical accessibility constraints to generate experimentally actionable 

candidates for validation. 

## Results 

Dataset construction reveals source -target mismatch in boron -additive chemical space 

We first formulated boron -containing electrolyte additive discovery as a sparse -

positive molecular exploration problem. To define the target search space, we 

collected 179,977 boron -containing candidate molecules from PubChem 31 . In parallel, 

we constructed a positive dataset of 126 experimentally reported boron -containing 

electrolyte additives extracted from Web of Science articles using a large  language 

model  (LLM) -assisted heuristic pipeline ( Fig. 2a  and  Methods M1 ). This design reflects 

a realistic discovery setting: successful additives are sparsely reported in the literature, 

whereas the accessible boron -containing chemical space is orders of magnitude larger 6

and remains largely unlabeled. 

To evaluate whether unstructured literature could provide reliable positive 

molecular knowledge, we manually verified the extracted information across multiple 

battery -relevant fields. The extraction pipeline achieved high accuracy for chemically 

important  categories, including 94% accuracy for additive identification, while requiring 

approximately 11 s per article and less than 60 CNY in total processing cost ( Fig. 2b ). 

These results indicate that LLM -assisted literature extraction can provide an efficient 

route to constructing a curated positive molecular set for downstream prototype 

learning. Overall dataset statistics are summarized in  Supplementary Table S1 .

The resulting datasets reveal a pronounced source -target distribution mismatch 

between literature -reported additives and the unlabeled boron -containing candidate 

space. Uniform manifold approximation and projection (UMAP) 34  based on Morgan 

fingerprint 35  representations shows that reported additives occupy restricted regions 

within the broader unlabeled molecular landscape rather than being uniformly 

distributed across it ( Fig. 2c ). Hierarchical clustering 36  dendrogram  further suggests 

that the reported additives contain recurring molecular patterns rather than isolated 

successful examples ( Supplementary Fig. S1 ). Consistently, the molecular -weight –

synthetic accessibility (SA) 37  map shows that positive molecules are concentrated 

mainly in low -to -moderate molecular -weight regions with moderate SA scores, 

whereas the unlabeled candidates span a much broader and more heterogeneous 

chemical space ( Fig. 2d ). 

Graph -level descriptors provide additional evidence for population -level 

differences between the positive and unlabeled sets. Reported additives and 

unlabeled candidates differ in molecular size and connectivity, as reflected by shifts in 

atom number, bond  number, average degree, graph density and degree entropy ( Fig. 

2e  and  Methods M2 ). Node -feature composition analysis further reveals feature -level 

differences between the two populations, suggesting that reported additives are 

enriched in specific local chemical environments. Representative shifted node 

features include scaled van der  Waals radius (N67), scaled covalent radius (N68), 

aromaticity indicator (N65), sp 2 hybridization (N59) and carbon atom identity (N00) 

(Fig. 2f  and  Supplementary Table S2 ). 

Together, these analyses define both the challenge and the opportunity of data -

scarce additive discovery. Experimentally reported additives are too sparse and 

distributionally biased to support exhaustive or purely supervised screening, yet they 7

exhibit non -random structural organization that may encode transferable chemical 

priors. We therefore next asked whether this organization could be learned as 

prototype -level knowledge and used to guide exploration of the broader unlabeled 

candidate space. 

Fig. 2 |  Dataset construction and source -target mismatch in boron -additive chemical space . a, 

Workflow for constructing the molecular datasets. The unlabeled search space consists of 179,977 

boron -containing candidate molecules collected from PubChem, whereas the positive dataset contains 

126 literature -reported boron -containing electrolyte additiv es extracted from Web of Science articles 

using an LLM -assisted heuristic pipeline . b,  Manual validation of the extraction pipeline across battery -

relevant fields, showing reliable extraction of chemically important information . c,  UMAP projection of 

Morgan fingerprint representations. Positive molecules are localized within restricted regions of the a

# c d

# e fb

65 70 75 80 85 95 90 

Additives Positive Electrodes 

Electrolytes 

Negative Electrodes Interphases Formats 60 CNY in total 

11 second/paper 

Accuracy (%) SA Score 

0 1000 2000 3000 4000 6000 5000 

Molecular weight (g/mol) 

> Unlabeled samples density

10 0

10 1

10 2

10 3

10 4

246810 

N67 N68 N65 N59 N00 N74 N64 N73 N60 N04 N46 

N45 

N52 N44 N02 

> Node Features

Positive Unlabeled 

0.100 0.050 0.000 0.050 0.100 

Node feature composition ratio 

-10 -5 0 5 10 15 

UMAP-1 

0510 15 20 

> Unlabeled samples density

10 0

10 1

10 2

Positive, n = 126 Unlabeled, n = 179,977 

> UMAP-2 Atoms Bonds Average
> degree
> Graph
> density
> Degree
> entropy

1.0 Positive Unlabeled 0 50 100 150 200 50 100 150 200 0.52 1.04 1.56 2.08 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 0.6 0.7 0.8 0.9 02.60 1.0 0.5 0.0 250 0.00 

Graph-level descriptor value 

250  

> +B(OCCC#N ...

Search by keywords 

126 Electrolytes Additives 

> Interphases

179,977 

Collect the positive molecule dataset Collect the unlabeled molecule dataset Positive, n = 126 Unlabeled, n = 179,977 8                 

> unlabeled molecular landscape, while background hexagons represent the logarithmic density of
> unlabeled candidates .d, Molecular -weight and SA distribution of positive and unlabeled molecules.
> Positive additives are enriched in low -to -moderate molecular -weight regions with moderate SA scores,
> whereas unlabeled candidates cover a broader chemical space .Molecular weights are shown within 0 -
> 6,000 g mol -1, as higher values are extremely rare (<0.1% of the dataset) .e, Graph -level descriptor
> distributions reveal differences in molecular size (Atoms and Bonds) , connectivity (Average degree )
> and topology (Graph density and Degree entropy) between the two molecular populations. f, Mirrored
> dumbbell plot showing normalized composition ratios of the most shifted node features, highlighting
> feature -level differences between positive and unlabeled molecules.

Reported additives encode transferable molecular prototypes 

The clustered organization of the positive dataset suggests that successful boron -

containing additives may share recurring structural principles rather than represent 

isolated molecular examples. To extract this organization, we applied an unsupervised 

graph  contrastive learning (UCL) model 38  to learn prototype -level representations from 

the 126 reported additives. Reported molecules were converted into molecular graphs 

and expanded into augmented graph views using graph augmentation operations 39 -43 ,

generating 756 augmented graph samples from the original positive set ( Fig. 3a  and 

Methods M3 ). Paired graph views were then encoded by a graph neural -network 

encoder and optimized with the InfoNCE  loss to learn augmentation -invariant 

molecular representations. The encoder consisted of repeated GINEConv, 

GraphNorm, ReLU and dropout layers for hierarchical graph representation extraction 

(Fig. 3b ). 

We first compared different molecular representation methods using clustering 

quality and computational cost as evaluation metrics (Fig. 3d ). Conventional 

fingerprint -based 44  and SMILES -based 45  representations produced relatively low 

silhouette scores 46  of 0.258 -0.337, indicating limited separation of reported additive 

groups in representation space. Graph -based encoders, including graph convolutional 

networks (GCN) 47 , graph attention networks (GAT) 48  and graph isomorphism networks 

with edge features (GINE) 49 , substantially improved cluster separability, with silhouette 

scores of 0.751 -0.832. Augmentation -enhanced graph representations further 

improved embedding organization relative to the corresponding non -augmented 

encoders. Among all tested methods, GINE+ achieved the highest silhouette scores 

using both K -Means 50  clustering and hierarchical clustering, with values of 0.853 and 

0.881, respectively. These results indicate that augmentation -invariant graph 

representations capture hidden structural organization within the reported additive set. 

Hierarchical clustering of the learned GINE+ representation space identified 

seven molecular prototypes (Fig. 3c  and  Supplementary Figs. S2,S3 ). These 9

prototypes displayed non -uniform motif distributions ( Fig. 3e ), indicating that they are 

organized by distinct combinations of recurring boron -related molecular fragments. 

For example, P3 was enriched in oxalate -containing and tetra -alkoxy frameworks, 

whereas P2 preferentially contained fluorinated aromatic fragment s. P4 was 

characterized by catechol -derived structures, while P6 and P7 were dominated by 

fluorinated alkoxy and tri -alkoxy frameworks, respectively. These motif -level 

differences suggest that the learned prototypes capture chemically meaningful 

structural  preferences rather than arbitrary clusters ( Supplementary Tables S3,S4 ). 

To further interpret the prototype space, we annotated the learned clusters using 

literature -supported functional categories and representative molecules ( Fig. 3c, 

Supplementary Fig. S4  and  Table S5 ). P1 showed relatively balanced contributions 

from interphase formation, solvation regulation and polymer strengthening, 

represented by the boron -containing heterocycle DiOB -Py, which has been reported 

to act as a mild anion receptor and facilitate interf acial charge transfer 25 . P2 combined 

Lewis acidity, solvation regulation and interphase formation, represented by 

tris(pentafluorophenyl)borane, whose fluorinated aromatic framework supports anion 

reception and interfacial stabilization 23 . P3 displayed a strong interface -engineering 

signature, represented by  Lithium difluoro(oxalato)borate  (LiDFOB ), which is known 

to form F - and B -rich interphases that suppress parasitic reactions and stabilize 

electrode surfaces 26 . P4 -P6 showed complementary stabilization -oriented profiles, 

represented by  lithium bis[1,2 -benzenediolato(2 -)-O,O']borate (LBBB) , 3-

Pyridinecarbonitrile BF (PCN)  and  tris(2,2,2 -trifluoroethyl)borate (TTFEB) , which 

illustrate weakly coordinating borate chemistry, Lewis acid -base interactions and 

fluorinated anion -receptor behavior 51 -53 . P7 was associated with solvation regulation 

and polymer strengthening, represented by tributyl borate, which promotes salt 

dissociation and boron -rich interphase formation in polymerized electrolyte systems 54 .

These results show that the positive additive set can be converted into a prototype 

library that captures both recurring structural motifs and literature -supported functional 

tendencies. Importantly, the prototypes are learned without direct performance la bels, 

making them suitable as transferable priors for candidate exploration under severe 

label scarcity. We therefore used this prototype library as the source knowledge for 

adaptation to the unlabeled boron -containing molecular space. 10 

Fig. 3 |  Interpretable molecular prototypes emerge from reported boron -containing electrolyte 

additives . a, Workflow of the unsupervised  graph  contrastive learning model.  Reported additives are 

converted from SMILES strings into molecular graphs and expanded into multiple augmented graph 

views  using five graph augmentation strategies . Paired graph views are encoded by graph neural -

network encoders and projection heads, followed by InfoNCE optimization to learn augmentation -

invariant molecular representations . b, Structure of the molecular  graph  encoder.  The encoder consists ae

# c

N×

GINEConv GraphNorm ReLU Dropout 

Input Graph Graph Embeddings 

# b

> B(C1=CC(=CC=C1)...

SMILES 

126 Samples 

Graph Augmentation 

756 Samples 

> (2) Edge Perturbation (1) Original Graph

Encoder 1 

Encoder 2 

Projection 1 

Projection 2 

InfoNCE Loss 

×6

# d

0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 

0.8 

> Silhouette score

050 100 150 200 

250 

> Time cost (s)

300 1.0 

Representations 

KMeans silhouette 

Hierarchical silhouette Hierarchical time KMeans time 

P1 P3 

P4 

P5 P6 P7 

Prototype 5 | 8.2%  

> Aryl –BF 3complexes
> PCN e.g. Functional bias profile

Prototype 7 | 15.5% 

> Trivalent boron species
> TBB e.g. Functional bias profile

P2 Prototype 6 | 13.0% 

> Perfluorinated boron species
> TTFEB e.g.
> Functional bias profile

Prototype 4 | 21.9% 

> Aromatic borate anion
> LBBB e.g. Functional bias profile

Prototype 3 | 18.1% 

> Inorganic borate anion
> LiDFOB e.g. Functional bias profile

Prototype 2 | 9.2% 

> Fluorinated aromatic boron compounds
> TPFPB e.g. Functional bias profile

Prototype 1 | 14.1% 

> Boron-containing heterocycles
> DiOB-Py e.g. Functional bias profile
> Solvation & desolvation
> Lewis acid & anion receptor LiF & B-O interface
> SEI/CEI formation
> Thermal & corrosion stability
> Polymer & gel strengthening
> HF & H 2Oscavenging
> Prototypes

P1-SM 

14 21 64 19 6 12 12 38 12 40 5 45 5 5 29 29 39 441 53 636 48 12 5 81 14 4

Relative motif composition (%) 

0 20 40 60 80 100 P1 P2 P3 P4 P5 P6 P7 P2-SM P3-SM P4-SM P5-SM P6-SM P7-SM SM: “shared motif” 

8-SM 11                                 

> of repeated GINEConv, GraphNorm, ReLU and dropout layers, producing graph -level embeddings for
> clustering and prototype discovery .In this work, the repeated 𝑁 equals 3. c, Functional interpretation of
> the learned prototype space. Seven chemically distinct prototypes are identified from reported additives.
> The surrounding panels show characteristic additive families, representative molecules and functional
> bias profiles acros sseven electrolyte -regulation mechanisms .d,Comparison of representation
> methods in terms of clustering quality (K-Mean sand hierarchical clusterin g)and computational cost.
> Silhouette scores quantify the separability of molecular cluster s.Methods labeled with “+” indicate
> augmentation -enhanced representations .e,Relative composition of representative boron -related
> motifs across the seven learned prototypes. The motif -level distribution shows that different prototypes
> are associated with distinct substructural preferences, suggesting that the learned representation space
> captures chemically meaningful organization .See the s hared -motif summary table in Supplementary
> Table S4 .

Prototype -guided adaptation transfers additive knowledge to unlabeled chemical space 

Although the prototype library extracted from reported additives captures transferable 

chemical organization, it does not by itself determine how limited experimental 

resources should be allocated within the much larger unlabeled candidate space. To 

addres s this challenge, we developed a prototype -guided semi -supervised contrastive 

learning  (PCL)  model, as the adaptation stage of ProtoMI ( Fig. 4a  and  Methods M4 ). 

The PCL module combines exponential moving average (EMA) 55  updating of 

prototype centroids, top -k prototype -relevant sample assignment and prototype 

decorrelation regularization. Together, these components are designed to transfer 

prototype -level knowledge from the positive additive domain to the unlabeled 

candid ate domain while maintaining both recommendation quality and prototype 

diversity. 

During training, the prototype centroids exhibited a characteristic three -stage 

trajectory, consisting of initial exploration, progressive refinement and eventual 

stabilization ( Fig. 4b ). The gradual reduction in prototype drift indicates that the model 

converges toward a stable prototype organization in the adapted molecular 

representation space. This behavior supports the use of adapted prototypes as 

anchors for candidate prioritizatio n. 

We next examined how prototype knowledge was transferred from the reported 

additive space to the unlabeled candidate space. The correspondence between 

original prototypes P1 -P7 and adapted , new  prototypes NP1 -NP7 shows that 

adaptation is not a simple one -to -one copying process ( Fig. 4c ). Instead, each adapted 

prototype integrates contributions from multiple original prototype regions, indicating 

that the PCL model reorganizes literature -derived knowledge according to the 

structure of the target candidate space while preserving prototype -level continuity. 

Consistently, the cosine -similarity map between initial and adapted prototypes shows 12 

strong diagonal correspondence together with structured off -diagonal relationships 

(Supplementary Fig. S5 ). Motif analysis further shows that characteristic boron -

containing fragments are retained and redistributed across adapted prototypes, 

supporting chemically meaningful transfer rather than arbitrary re -clustering 

(Supplementary Fig. S6 ). 

We then benchmarked the complete ProtoMI framework against multiple 

recommendation strategies ( Table 1  and  Fig. 4d ). ProtoMI achieved high prototype 

similarity, assignment entropy and cluster separability, with values of 0.7 89  ± 0.03 0,

0.723 and 0.976, respectively.  This  indicat es  that recommended molecules remain 

both structurally coherent  (Supplementary  Fig . S7) and broadly distributed across 

multiple prototype regions  (Supplementary  Fig . S8). The corresponding entropy -

weighted prototype similarity  (Method s M5) reached 0.57  (or 57% ), exceeding the 

competing recommendation pipelines. These results indicate that ProtoMI  selects 

molecules that remain close to learned prototype regions while preserving coverage 

across multiple chemically distinct directions, thereby avoiding collapse into a few 

dominant structural families. 

Ablation analysis further clarifies the contribution of each PCL component ( Fig. 

4e ). Removing top -k assignment reduces the model’s ability to select high -confidence 

molecules most compatible with each prototype. Removing prototype decorrelation 

decreases inter -prototype separation and promotes redundancy among adapted 

prototype directio ns. Removing EMA updating destabilizes cross -domain adaptation 

by allowing abrupt prototype shifts during training. The performance degradation 

observed after removing these components indicates that effective prototype 

adaptation requires coordinated cont rol of sample confidence, prototype diversity and 

transfer stability  (Supplementary  Fig . S9). The  conclusion is  further  supported by 

additional statistics in  Supplementary Table S6 .

Finally, we evaluated whether prototype adaptation improves discovery efficiency 

using retrospective temporal validation. Across four temporal splits using 2017, 2019, 

2021 and 2023 as cutoff years, ProtoMI recovered future -reported additives with recall 

rates of 8.8 -20.0% while screening only 0.19 -1.27% of the candidate space, 

corresponding to enrichment factors of 9.2 -45.6 relative to random screening ( Fig. 4f 

and  Supplementary Table S7 ). Pareto -front analysis further shows that ProtoMI 

concentrates discovery efforts into a small fraction of the search space while 

preserving substantial recall, corresponding to effective search -space reductions of 13 

79 -517  fold s (Fig. 4g ). These results demonstrate that sparse literature -derived 

prototype knowledge can be transferred into unlabeled chemical space to improve 

candidate prioritization under limited experimental budgets. 

Fig.  4 | Prototype adaptation transfers additive knowledge to unlabeled boron -containing 

chemical space . a,  Workflow of the PCL  module  within  ProtoMI . Molecular prototypes extracted from 

reported boron -containing electrolyte additives are used to guide representation learning and candidate 

recommendation in the unlabeled molecular space . b,  Mean evolution of prototype drift during training a bd f

# c

1.5 1.4 1.3 1.2 

1.1 

50 100 150 200 250 300      

> Prototype drift
> Stage ⅠStage ⅡStage Ⅲ

Training epoch 

× 10 -3 

NP1 NP2 NP3 

NP4 NP5 NP6 NP7 

> 0

60 45 30 15 0

> Entropy-weighted
> prototype similarity (%)
> Assignment fraction (%)

100 75 50 25 0     

> 57 42 29 28 24
> 9
> 3200

USL Encoder 

Positive molecules 

Unlabeled molecules 

> {Mol_ID: Prototype_ID}

PCL Encoder 

Projection       

> {Prototype_ID: Embeddings}
> P1 P2 P3 P4 P5 P6 P7
> Cosine Similarity
> Top-25 samples for each batch

Decor Loss Proto Loss ＋ Back propagation 

Loss Function 

> EMA Update
> Graphs
> P1 P2 P3 P4 P5 P6 P7 NP1 NP2 NP3 NP4 NP5 NP6
> Old prototypes New prototypes

# e

w/o EMA w/o decor. w/o top-k 

> Degradation score

0.540 0.048 0.095 0.602 

0.443 0.602 0.046 1.000 

0.590 0.571 0.099 1.000 

> 1.0 0.5 0

# g

20 15 10 50

> Recall (%)

25 2017 2019 2023 

0.1 

Experimental budget (%) 

0.2 0.5 1 2 

> 3/34 4/20 5/47 5/43

2021 

> 517 ×
> reduced
> 218 × reduced
> 99 ×
> reduced
> 79 ×
> reduced
> Recall (%)

Cutoff year 

20 15 10 5025 40 30 20 10 0

> Enrichment factor

50     

> 10.6 11.6 8.8 20.0 0.026 0.019 0.011 0.024
> 10.5 ×9.2 ×
> 45.6 ×
> 43.6 ×

Recall: gray, random; color, ProtoMI  

> 348 825 2279 Recommended molecule No.

14 

across 10 trials. Prototype centroids undergo an initial exploration stage (Stage I), followed by 

progressive refinement (Stage II) and eventual stabilization (Stage III), revealing the emergence of a 

converged prototype organization in the learned molecula r representation space.  c,  Knowledge 

retention between original prototypes and adapted prototypes. The Sankey diagram shows the 

redistribution of structural motifs from reported -additive prototypes to newly formed prototypes in 

unlabeled molecular space . d,  Entropy -weighted prototype similarity and prototype distribution of 

molecules  selected  by different  recommendation pipelines . ProtoMI maintains high prototype 

consistency while preserving coverage across multiple prototypes.  e, Ablation analysis of key 

components in  the PCL module . Removing EMA updating, prototype decorrelation or top -k prototype 

selection degrades recommendation quality, highlighting their roles in stable prototype formation and 

effective knowledge transfer.  f, Temporal validation using historical splits. Recall rates are compared 

with random screening, and the red line indicates the enrichment factor achieved under limited 

experimental budgets . g,  Pareto front of discovery efficiency. Bubble size represents the number of 

recommended molecules, illustrating the trade -off between recall ability and experimental budget 

across different historical splits.  “x/y” in the figure indicates  the correct prediction of  x molecules among 

the literature reported  y molecules. 

Table 1 |  Recommendation performance of ProtoMI and baseline strategies 

Category  Method  Similarity  Entropy  Silhouette 

Random  Random selection  0.521 ± 0.147  0.529  0.596 

Fingerprint  Morgan fingerprints  0.497 ± 0.177  0.836  0.408 

Encoder  UCL encoder only  0.085 ± 0.010  0.349  -0.185 

PCL encoder only  0.728 ± 0.045  0.404  0.968 

Clustering  UCL encoder clustering  0.079 ± 0.021  0.260  0.786 

PCL encoder clustering  0.571 ± 0.110  0.426  0.916 

Prototype -

guided  ProtoMI  0.789±0.030  0.723  0.976 

Ablation 

w/o EMA  0.141 ± 0.036  0.669  0.253 

w/o decorrelation  0.080 ± 0.014  0.037  -0.224 

w/o top -k 0.257 ± 0.000  0.000  N/A 

Bold and gray -shaded values indicate the best and second -best performance, respectively .

Knowledge -guided translation converts recommendations into testable candidates 

Prototype adaptation reduced the original search space from 179,977 boron -

containing candidates to 30, 800  ProtoMI -recommended molecules. However, many 

recommended molecules remained chemically impractical or experimentally 

inaccessible. To bridge the gap between computational prioritization and laboratory 

validation, we developed a knowledge -guided translation strate gy that incorporates 

empirical additive -design constraints and practical accessibility requirements ( Fig. 5a 

and  Method s M6 ). 

The translation workflow sequentially applied filters based on PubChem CID 

validity, molecular -weight range, synthetic accessibility, active -hydrogen exclusion, 

Chemical Abstracts Service (CAS) availability and practical cost. This process reduced 15 

the recommendation pool from 30,799 molecules to 68 supplier -accessible candidates, 

which were further prioritized according to purchasability, cost and prototype 

traceability  (Supplementary Fig . S10  and  Supplementary  Table S8 ). Four low -cost 

commercially available molecules were selected for experimental consideration 

(Supplementary Table S9 ). This workflow separates the model -driven 

recommendation stage from the practical translation stage, ensuring that 

experimentally selected molecules are both chemically relevant and accessible under 

realistic resource constraints. 

To assess whether prototype -level organization was preserved during translation, 

we projected the retained molecules onto the adapted representation landscape ( Fig. 

5b ). Post -screened molecules remained distributed across multiple prototype regions, 

indicating that practical filtering did not collapse the recommendations into a single 

structural family. No commercially accessible molecules were retained from NP4 and 

NP7  after final filtering, although candidate molecules from these regions existed 

before post -screening. This suggests that their absence among final candidates 

reflects practical accessibility constraints rather than a lack of prototype coverage. 

Representa tive unselected molecules, UM #1-UM #3, are shown to illustrate 

structurally plausible molecules that were present in the unlabeled pool but not 

retained as final experimental candidates. 

Together, these results show that knowledge -guided translation serves as a 

practical bridge between prototype -guided molecular exploration and experimental 

implementation. By incorporating feasibility and accessibility constraints after model 

recommendatio n, ProtoMI  converts a large prioritized molecular pool into a small set 

of experimentally actionable candidates. 16 

Fig.  5 | Knowledge -guided translation converts ProtoMI recommendations into experimentally 

actionable candidates . a,  Post -screening workflow applied to molecules recommended by ProtoMI .

Sequential filtering based on PubChem CID validity, molecular -weight range, synthetic accessibility, 

active hydrogen exclusion, CAS availability and practical cost considerations progressively reduced 

30,800 recommended molecules to four experimentally s elected candidates. Numbers below each step 

indicate the remaining candidate pool after filtering . b,  Distribution of recommended molecules in the 

transferred molecular representation space. Colored regions denote  7 new prototype domains (NP1 -

NP7) formed after transferring prototype knowledge to the unlabeled boron -containing molecular space. 

Representative molecules associated with each new prototype are shown to illustrate the chemical 

motifs captured by the transferred prototype regions. Rep resentative unlabeled molecules (UM#1 -

UM#3) are additionally shown from the broader molecular space to indicate structurally plausible 

molecules that were present in the unlabeled pool but not retained as final experimental candidates. 17 

> Experimental validation in high -temperature LiFePO 4||graphite cells

To validate whether a ProtoMI -recommended molecule could translate into 

measurable battery performance improvement, we selected one representative 

candidate, 4,4,5,5 -tetramethyl -2-[10 -(1 -naphthyl)anthracen -9-yl] -1,3,2 -dioxaborolane 

(TNDB; NP3#6), for elect rochemical testing ( Fig. 6a ). LiFePO 4||graphite cells were 

chosen because this chemistry is widely used in electric vehicles and stationary 

energy storage, while its cycling stability at elevated temperature remains limited by 

parasitic interfacial reactions and transition -metal  crossover 32,33 . The additive -

containing electrolyte was prepared by introducing 1 wt% TNDB into the baseline 

electrolyte  (1M LiPF 6 in  ethylene carbonate ( EC ):dimethyl carbonate ( DMC ) = 3:7 v/v )

and  tested at 55 °C. Compared with the baseline electrolyte, the TNDB -containing cell 

showed improved capacity retention, with a  34.93%  improvement at the 100 th  cycle 

(Fig. 6b ). Because high -temperature degradation in  LiFePO 4||graphite cells is 

associated with electrolyte decomposition, SEI instability and Fe 

dissolution/deposition 32,33 , we next investigated how TNDB alters  the  interphase 

chemistry. 

The chemical contribution of TNDB to SEI formation was first examined using X -

ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS). High -resolution B 1s spectra collected from 

graphite electrodes recovered from TNDB -containing cells showed B –F and B –O

coordination environ ments after both formation and 100 cycles ( Fig. 6c ), indicating that 

TNDB -derived boron species are incorporated into the graphite interphase. XPS after 

formation further showed a small but detectable B signal only in the TNDB -containing 

cell, together with a higher F atomic fraction and a lower O atomic  fraction relative to 

the baseline cell ( Fig. 6d ). These surface -composition changes suggest that TNDB 

contributes to a B/F -containing interphase and suppresses the accumulation of 

oxygen -rich decomposition products during early SEI formation. 

F 1s XPS was then used to analyze fluorinated interphase species after formation 

(Fig. 6e ). In both electrolytes, LiF remained the dominant fluorinated component, while 

the TNDB -containing electrolyte showed a modified distribution of LiF, Li xPF y and 

LiₓPOF y species. Specifically, the LiF contribution remained high in the TNDB -

containing cell, whereas the  LiₓPOF y contribution increased relative to the baseline 

electrolyte. This indicates that TNDB does not simply increase the total LiF  fraction at 

the outermost surface, but instead modifies the formation of F - and P/O -containing 

inorganic interphase species. Together with the B 1s results, these XPS signatures 18 

support the formation of a TNDB -modified inorganic interphase on graphite. 

The organic and inorganic carbonate components of the graphite SEI were further 

analyzed by C 1s XPS peak deconvolution ( Fig. 6f  and  Supplementary Fig. S11 ). 

Following common assignments for graphite SEI analysis, the C 1s spectra were fitted 

into  C-C, C -O, C=O, ROCO 2Li and  Li 2CO 3 components 56,57 . In the baseline electrolyte, 

oxygenated organic SEI species, including C -O, C=O and  ROCO 2Li , accounted for 38% 

of the fitted C 1s area after formation and remained at 32% after 100 cycles. In contrast, 

the TNDB -containing electrolyte showed lower oxygenated organic contributions, 

decreasing from 28% after formation to 26% after 100 cycles. The  Li 2CO 3 contribution 

after 100 cycles was also reduced from 4% in the baseline cell to 1% in the TNDB -

containing cell. These results indicate that TNDB suppresses the accumulation of 

carbonate -derived organic species and inorganic carbonate residues during high -

te mperature cycling. 

Time -of -flight secondary ion mass spectrometry (ToF -SIMS) provided depth -

resolved evidence for TNDB -mediated SEI reconstruction ( Fig. 6 g and  Supplementary 

Fig. S12 ). Representative negative secondary -ion fragments, including  CH 3CO ⁻, PO 2⁻,

CO 3⁻ and  LiF 2⁻, were used to visualize solvent -derived organic fragments, LiPF 6-

derived P -O species, carbonate -containing residues and LiF -related inorganic species, 

respectively 58,59 . In the baseline electrolyte,  CH3CO- and  CO3- fragments extended 

broadly through the analyzed interphase volume, consistent with heterogeneous 

accumulation of carbonate -derived decomposition products. In contrast, graphite 

electrodes cycled with TNDB showed attenuated oxygenated organic fragments and 

a reorganized distribution of  LiF 2⁻ and  PO 2⁻ species. These depth -resolved signatures 

are consistent with a graphite interphase that is less dominated by organic carbonate 

decomposition and contains redistributed salt -derived inorganic components 60,61 .

Additive -derived boron incorporation was further visualized using x -z cross -

sectional ToF -SIMS maps of the B ⁻ fragment in graphite electrodes cycled with TNDB 

(Supplementary Fig. S13 ). A sparse and discontinuous B ⁻ signal was observed after 

formation, whereas a more extensive B ⁻ distribution appeared after 100 cycles, 

indicating progressive incorporation and retention of boron -containing species within 

the SEI. Sputter -depth profiles of representative SEI fragments further showed that 

CH 3CO ⁻ signals were attenuated in the TNDB -containing electrolyte, supporting 

suppressed accumulation of solvent -derived organic decomposition products 19 

(Supplementary Fig. S14 ). The FeO ⁻ depth profile was also strongly suppressed after 

formation and remained lower after extended cycling in the TNDB -containing cell 

(Supplementary Fig. S15 ). Because transition -metal deposits on graphite can catalyze 

electrolyte reduction and destabilize the anode interphase 62 , the reduced FeO ⁻ signal 

suggests that TNDB -derived interphase chemistry mitigates Fe contamination of the 

graphite surface. 

SEM and EDS analyses provided complementary information on surface 

morphology and Fe deposition. SEM images show the morphology of graphite 

electrodes recovered after formation and after 100 cycles with and without TNDB 

(Supplementary Fig. S16 ). EDS mapping further revealed pronounced Fe 

accumulation on graphite electrodes cycled in the baseline electrolyte, with the Fe 

fraction in selected mapping regions increasing from 2.06 wt% after formation to 3.61 

wt% after 100 cycles ( Fig. 6h ). In contrast, graphite electrodes cycled with TNDB 

showed substantially lower Fe accumulation, with corresponding values of 0.23 wt% 

after formation and 1.04 wt % after 100 cycles. These values correspond to 89% and 

71% lower Fe contents, respectively, relative to the baseline electrolyte. The reduced 

Fe deposition may help suppress Fe -catalyzed electrolyte decomposition and 

interphase deterioration during high -te mperature cycling. 20 

Fig. 6 | Interphase regulation by the TNDB under 55 °C cycling. a , Molecular structure of TNDB 

shown as a  ball -and -stick model; grey, C; red, O; pink, B; and white, H.  b, Capacity retention of 

LiFePO 4||graphite  coin  cells containing the baseline or TNDB -containing electrolyte during cycling at 

55 °C.  The shadings indicate the deviation of two reproducible cells.  c, High -resolution B 1s XPS spectra 

of graphite electrodes recovered from TNDB -containing cells after formation and 100 cycles, with the 

fitted components assigned to B -F and B -O.  d, XPS -derived relative atomic concentrations of C, O, F, 

P and B on graphite electrodes recovered from baseline and TNDB -containing cells after formation . e,

F 1s XPS spectra of graphite electrodes recovered from cells  with and without TNDB after the formation ,

with the fitted components assigned to  LiF, Li xPF y, Li xPOF y. f, Relative C 1s peak  area fractions of C -C, 

C-O, C -O, ROC O2Li and L i2CO3 for graphite electrodes recovered from baseline and TNDB -containing 

cells after formation and 100 cycles.  g, Merged three -dimensional ToF -SIMS compositional renderings 

of C H3CO ⁻ (red), P O2⁻ (blue), C O3⁻ (yellow) and Li F2⁻ (green) fragments in the corresponding graphite 21    

> interphases. h, Representative Fe EDS maps (inset) and corresponding semi -quantitative Fe contents
> of the graphite electrodes.

Operando Fourier transform infrared spectroscopy (FTIR) was collected during 

the formation step at 55 °C to monitor electrolyte and interphase evolution under 

operating conditions ( Fig. 7a,b ). The upper panels show time -resolved absorbance 

spectra, while the lower panels show difference spectra,  ΔA(t) =  A(t) – A( t0), where  t is 

the time and  t0 corresponds to the beginning of charge . In the baseline electrolyte, the 

difference spectra show a gradual increase in the organic semi -carbonate region. 

Bands around 1640 -1670 cm ⁻¹ can be assigned to lithium semi -carbonate and lithium 

alkyl carbonate species, such as lithium methyl carbonate and lithium ethylene 

dicarbonate, according to previous operando infrared studies 63,64 . Quantitative 

integration of this region shows a faster growth of organic semi -carbonate species in 

the baseline cell than in the TNDB -containing cell ( Fig. 7c ). At the end of charge, the 

integrated response was 0.25 a.u. cm ⁻¹ for the baseline electrolyte and 0.17 a.u. cm ⁻¹

for the TNDB -containing electrolyte, consistent with suppressed formation of 

carbonate -derived organic SEI species. 

The  PF 6⁻-related P-F stretching region also evolved differently in the two 

electrolytes.  We use the integrated  PF 6⁻ response  between  820 -880  cm -1 to track 

PF 6⁻-related interfacial evolution. The baseline electrolyte developed a positive end -

point response in this region, whereas the TNDB -containing electrolyte showed a 

negative end -point response ( Fig. 7d ). This contrast indicates that TNDB changes the 

direction and magnitude of  PF 6⁻-related  spectral evolution during formation. When 

considered together with the XPS and ToF -SIMS results, the operando FTIR data 

suggests  that TNDB suppresses carbonate -solvent decomposition while modifying 

salt -derived interfacial chemistry. 

Overall, the post -mortem and operando evidence supports a coherent interphase -

regulation mechanism for  improved  high -temperature cycling performance. TNDB 

participates in graphite interphase construction by introducing B -containing species, 

modifying F -, P-, and  O-containing inorganic components, suppressing carbonate -

derived organic SEI accumulation and reducing Fe deposition on graphite. These 

coupled effects provide a plausible explanation for the improved capacity retention of 

LiFePO 4||graphite cells cycled at 55 °C with the ProtoMI -recommended TNDB additive. 22 

Fig. 7 | Operando FTIR analysis of electrolyte and interphase evolution during 55 °C formation. 

a,b,  Time -resolved absorbance spectra (top) and corresponding difference spectra , A(t)-A(t0) (bottom), 

collected during the formation -charge step at 55  °C for LiFeP O4||graphite cells containing the baseline 

electrolyte ( a) and the TNDB -containing electrolyte ( b). The dashed lines delimit the 1640 -1670 c m-1

region associated with  organic  semi -carbonate  species . The P -F stretching region of P F6- is indicated 

at approximately 8 20-880 c m-1. Identical color scales are used for direct comparison.  c,  Time evolution 

of the integrated absolute difference absorbance  within the  organic  semi -carbonate  region  with and 

without  TNDB . d,  Integrated spectral changes for  organic  semi -carbonate  and  the PF 6⁻ P-F stretching 

region  at the end of  the  1st  charge .

## Discussion  and conclusion 

In this work, we develop ProtoMI as a molecular discovery framework for data -scarce 

settings in which experimentally validated molecules are sparse and most candidate 

molecules remain unlabeled. Rather than treating additive discovery as a conventional 

sup ervised property -prediction problem, ProtoMI re -formulates it as an efficient 

exploration problem. Sparse literature -derived successes are converted into 

transferable prototype representations, adapted to a broader unlabeled candidate 

space and translated into experimentally actionable molecules through  practical 0.25 0.75 0.17  

> −1.43
> 0123
> Time (h)
> w/o TNDB Organic semi-carbonate vC=O vO-C-O vC-C ring
> 0123
> Time (h)
> −0.1
> 0.1 0.3 0.5 0.7
> Absorbance (a.u.)
> w/ TNDB vC-C ring vO-C-O vC=O Organic semi-carbonate

# a b      

> 2000 1800 1600 1400 1200 1000 800 0123

Wavenumber (cm -1 )Time (h)        

> PF 6-PF 6-
> 2000 1800 1600 1400 1200 1000 800 0123

Wavenumber (cm -1 )Time (h)        

> −0.04 −0.02
> 0.00 0.02 0.04
> A(t)-A(t0) (a.u.)
> 0.0 0.5 1.0 1.5 2.0 2.5 3.0 3.5 0.0 0.1 0.2 0.3
> A(t)-A(t0) area (a.u. ∙cm -1 )

Time (h) 

> w/o TNDB w/ TNDB

Organic semi-carbonate 

# c

Organic carbonate PF 6-

> −2.0 −1.5 −1.0 −0.5
> 0.0 0.5 1.0 1.5 2.0
> A(t)-A(t0) area (a.u. ∙cm -1 )
> w/o TNDB w/ TNDB

# d At the end of charge 23 

chemical constraints. This workflow allows limited experimental resources to be 

concentrated on chemically promising regions rather than distributed across the full 

candidate space. 

A central feature of ProtoMI  is that knowledge transfer occurs at the prototype 

level rather than at the level of individual molecules. Conventional similarity -based 

recommendation strategies tend to remain close to previously reported compounds 

and may therefore restrict exploration  to local molecular neighborhoods. In contrast, 

ProtoMI learns higher -order organization from groups of reported additives and 

transfers this organization across source -target distribution mismatch. The 

preservation and redistribution of prototype identities after adaptation suggest that the 

framework captures transferable chemical relationships instead of simply memorizing 

known molecular structures. This prototype -centr ic strategy provides a practical route 

to extending sparse literature knowledge into structurally broader regions of chemical 

space. 

The experimental validation demonstrates how ProtoMI  recommendations can be 

connected to battery performance. As a representative candidate, TNDB improved the 

high -temperature cycling stability of LiFePO 4||graphite cells relative to the baseline 

electrolyte.  XPS, ToF -SIMS, EDS mapping and operando FTIR analyses indicate that 

TNDB incorporates B -containing species into the graphite interphase, modifies F/P/O -

containing inorganic SEI components, suppresses carbonate -solvent decomposition, 

alters PF 6⁻-related spectral evolution and reduces Fe deposition on graphite . These 

coupled interfacial effects provide a plausible explanation for the improved capacity 

retention observed at 55 °C. At the same time, the present experimental validation 

should be interpreted as a proof of concept for one representative ProtoMI -

reco mmended candidate rather than exhaustive validation of all recommended 

molecules. 

More broadly, this study highlights the importance of discovery efficiency in 

scientific problems where labels are scarce, and candidate spaces are large. Under 

such conditions, maximizing predictive accuracy for individual molecules may be less 

practical  than improving the allocation of limited experimental resources. 

Retrospective temporal validation shows that literature -derived prototype knowledge 

can enrich future -reported additives while screening only a small fraction of the 

candidate space. This sug gests that prototype -guided exploration can complement 

supervised prediction, physics -informed modeling and active -learning workflows by 24 

serving as an upstream candidate -prioritization strategy. 

Several limitations remain. The current implementation focuses on boron -

containing electrolyte additives and relies primarily on structural molecular 

representations. It does not yet explicitly incorporate electrochemical stability, reaction 

pathways, solv ation structures, synthesis routes or cell -level performance labels. In 

addition, the translation stage depends on empirical filters and commercial availability 

constraints, which may bias the final experimentally selected candidates. Future 

studies could  integrate physics -informed descriptors, quantum -chemical calculations, 

synthesis -planning tools, multimodal molecular representations and active 

experimental feedback to further improve recommendation quality and practical 

accessibility. With these extensi ons, prototype -guided knowledge transfer may provide 

a general route for molecular discovery under severe label scarcity. 

## Methods 

M1.  Data collection . For  the searching  space  molecules dataset, we use d keywords 

(Borane, Borate, Boric, Boron, Boronic, Boronate , Additive, Electrolyte ) to inquire the 

boron -related molecules  and  their  molecular information , including  formula,  SMILES, 

fingerprint,  topological,  weight,  and  heavy  atom . For the positive  samples dataset, we 

used the heuristic extraction process to  obtain  the literature information of each 

reported boron -containing electrolyte additive molecul e.  The  details  of  the  LLM -

assist ed  data -mining  pipeline  is  provided  in  Supplementary  Fig . S17. Finally , we  get 

179,977  boron -containing molecules as the  searching  space  molecules dataset and 

126  reported boron electrolyte additive molecules as the  positive samples dataset. 

M2. Graph -level descriptors.  To characterize the global topological properties of        

> molecules, several graph -level descriptors were calculated, including atom number ( 𝑁 ), bond
> number ( 𝐸 ), average degree ( 𝑘 ̅), graph density ( 𝐷 ), and degree entropy ( 𝐻 ). The average
> degree was defined as
> 𝑘 ̅=1
> 𝑁 ∑𝑘 =2𝐸
> 𝑁
> 𝑁
> =1
> (1)

where  𝑘  denotes the degree of node  𝑖 . Graph density, which measures the fraction of 

existing bonds relative to the maximum possible number of bonds, was calculated as 

𝐷  = 2𝐸 

𝑁 (𝑁  − 1) (2)

To quantify the heterogeneity of node connectivity, the degree entropy was 25 

computed using the Shannon entropy of the degree distribution, 

𝐻  = − ∑ 𝑝 (𝑘 ) log  𝑝 (𝑘 )

> 𝑘

(3)

where  𝑝 (𝑘 ) denotes the probability that a node has degree  𝑘  . These descriptors 

collectively characterize molecular size, connectivity and topological complexity. 

M3. Unsupervised graph contrastive learning (U CL)  model . To extract prototype 

knowledge from experimentally reported  boron electrolyte  additive  molecules , an 

unsupervised graph contrastive learning strategy was first applied to all  reported boron 

electrolyte additive molecules . Each molecule was represented as a graph  𝑅𝐺  =

(𝑅𝑉  , 𝑅𝐸  ), where node features describe atomic attributes and edge features describe 

bond -level information. During training, two views of each molecular graph were 

constructed for contrastive learning.  The first view preserves the original structure, 

while the second view is generated via stochastic edge perturbation :

𝑅𝐺  (1) = 𝑅𝐺  , (4)

𝑅𝐺  (2) = (𝑅𝑉  , (𝑅𝐸  \ 𝑅𝐸  𝑑𝑒𝑙  ) ∪ 𝑅𝐸  𝑎𝑑𝑑  ), (5)

|𝑅𝐸  𝑑𝑒𝑙  | = |𝑅𝐸  𝑎𝑑𝑑  | = ⌊𝜌 |𝑅𝐸  |

2 ⌋ (6)

where  𝑅 𝐸  𝑑𝑒𝑙  and  𝑅𝐸  𝑎𝑑𝑑  denote the sets of removed and newly added edges, 

respectively , and  𝜌  = 0.1 controls the perturbation ratio . The two graph views were 

then encoded by  a three -layer  gra ph neural  network (GNN).  The layer -wise 

propagation can be formulated as :

𝐻 (𝑙 ) = 𝐷𝑟𝑜𝑝𝑜𝑢𝑡  (𝑅𝑒𝐿𝑈  (𝐺𝑟𝑎𝑝 ℎ𝑁𝑜𝑟𝑚  (𝐺𝐼𝑁𝐸 (𝑙 )(𝐻 (𝑙 −1), 𝑅𝐸  )))) , 𝑙  = 1,2,3 (7)

where  𝐻 (0) = 𝑅𝑋  denotes the initial node feature matrix  and  𝑙  represents the layer 

number of this GNN encoder.  The graph -level representation was obtained via global 

mean pooling: 

ℎ𝑅𝐺 𝑖  = 𝑓 𝜃  

> 𝑈𝑆𝐿

(𝑅 𝐺  ) = 𝑀𝑒𝑎𝑛𝑃𝑜𝑜𝑙 (𝐻 (3)) = 1

𝑅𝑉  ∑ ℎ𝑣 

> (3)
> 𝑣 ∈𝑅 𝑉 𝑖

(8)

where  ℎ𝑣  

> (3)

represents the embedding of node after the third layer GNN, and  𝑓 𝜃  

> 𝑈𝑆𝐿

is 

the three -layer encoder for this unsupervised learning stage.  To optimize the 

representation space, the graph embeddings were further mapped by projection heads 

𝑔 1(⋅)and  𝑔 2(⋅):

𝑧  (1) = 𝑔 1(ℎ𝑅 𝐺 𝑖  

> (1)

), 𝑧  (2) = 𝑔 2(ℎ𝑅𝐺 𝑖  

> (2)

) (9)26 

The use of separate projection heads follows standard contrastive learning 

practice to improve representation quality.  The model was trained using an  InfoNCE 

contrastive loss  (Method M 10 ), which  encourages embeddings from two augmented 

views of the same molecule to be close, while separating them from other molecules 

in the batch . After each training epoch, molecular embeddings were L2 -normalized 

and clustered using  hierarchical clustering with  outlier filtering , average linkage and 

cosine distance  (Method M 9). The optimal number of clusters was determined by 

maximizing the average silhouette score  (Meth od M 5) over a predefined range. The 

model achieving the highest silhouette score was selected as the final representation 

model and used to define molecular prototypes for subsequent prototype -guided 

learning. 

M4. Prototype semi -supervised contrastive learning  model . To transfer prototype 

knowledge from experimentally reported  boron electrolyte  additive  molecules  to the 

unlabeled molecular space, we developed a prototype semi -supervised contrastive 

learning  model . First,  we use the pre -trained molecular representation model  (Method 

M3) to  generate  prototype -level embeddings  for  all experimentally reported  additive 

molecules  ℎ𝑅𝐺 𝑖  , and  followed by  a randomly initialized  projection head  which  is 

motivated by the need to improve robustness and avoid representation bias induced 

by the contrastive pretraining objective :

= 𝑁𝑜𝑟𝑚  (𝑔 ′ (𝑓 𝜃  

> 𝑈𝑆𝐿

(𝑅 𝐺  ))) (10 )

where  𝑔 ′(⋅) denotes the projection head.  Hierarchical clustering with average linkage 

and cosine distance was then applied to the normalized positive -sample embeddings. 

The optimal number of clusters was determined by comparing clustering quality across 

candidate cluster numbers. Each cluster was  regarded as a molecular prototype group, 

and the corresponding prototype label  table  𝑅𝐿  was assigned to each positive additive :

𝑅𝐿  = HierarchicalCluster ( ) (11 )

Next , positive additives and unlabeled candidate molecules were jointly used  to 

train the prototype semi -supervised contrastive learning model.  At each epoch, 

prototype centroids were first recalculated from the positive additives according to their 

prototype labels. For prototype  𝑛  , the centroid was computed as the mean 

representation of positive samples assigned to this prototype: 27 

𝑝  , 𝑒𝑤  

> (𝑡 )

= 𝑁𝑜𝑟𝑚  ( 1

∣ 𝒫  ∣ ∑ (𝑡 )

> ∈𝒫 𝑛

) (12 )

where  𝒫  denotes the set of positive additives assigned to prototype  𝑛 , and  (𝑡 ) is the 

normalized embedding produced by the current model at epoch  𝑡 . To avoid unstable 

prototype shifts during semi -supervised adaptation, the prototype centroids were 

updated using an exponential moving average 55 :

𝑝  (𝑡 ) = 𝑚 𝑝 (𝑡 −1) + (1 − 𝑚 )𝑝  , 𝑒𝑤  

> (𝑡 )

, 𝑚  = 0.999  (13 )

where  𝑚  is the momentum coefficient. This update allows the prototypes to gradually 

adapt from the positive -only representation space toward the broader unlabeled 

molecular space while preserving the original prototype knowledge extracted from 

experimentally repor ted additives. 

At the beginning of the model training, a  new  GNN  encoder and projection head 

were initialized and trained using both positive and unlabeled molecular graphs . For 

each  mini -batch, the similarity between molecular embeddings and prototype 

centroids was calculated by cosine similarity . F or each prototype, the top -k molecules 

with the highest similarity to that prototype were selected as prototype -relevant core 

samples.  The embeddings of the selected molecules can be expressed in: 

= 𝑔 ′′  (𝑓 𝜃  

> 𝑃𝐶𝐿

(𝐺  ))

‖𝑔 ′′  (𝑓 𝜃 

> 𝑃𝐶𝐿

(𝐺  ))‖2

, (14 )

𝑠  = 𝑠𝑖𝑚 ( , 𝑝  ), (15 )

ℐ(𝐾 ) = TopK ({𝑠 1 , 𝑠 2 , … , 𝑠 𝑁  }) , (16 )

= {𝐳  ∣ 𝑖  ∈ ℐ(𝐾 )} . (17 )

where  𝐺  ∈ {𝑅 𝐺  , 𝑈 𝐺  } denotes either a reported positive molecular graph or an 

unlabeled molecular graph;  𝑓 𝜃  

> 𝑃𝐶𝐿

is the newly initialized GNN encoder;  𝑔 ′′ (⋅) is the 

newly initialized projection head;  𝐳  is the normalized embedding of molecule  𝑖  ; 𝑝 

denotes the centroid of the  𝑛  -th prototype;  𝑠  is the cosine similarity between 

molecule  𝑖  and prototype  𝑛  ; 𝑁  is the number of molecules in the mini -batch;  ℐ (𝐾 )

represents the index set of the top -k molecules most similar to prototype  𝑛 ; and 

denotes the corresponding set of selected prototype -relevant embeddings. In this work, 

𝐾  = 25 .

This strategy restricts contrastive optimization to molecules that are most relevant 28 

to each prototype, thereby reducing the influence of low -confidence unlabeled 

samples and preventing noisy candidates from dominating the representation learning 

process.  For prototype  𝑛 , the selected molecules were optimized using a prototype 

contrastive loss  (Method M 10 ). To encourage different prototypes to encode distinct 

molecular patterns, a prototype decorrelation regularization term was introduced 

(Method M 10 ). The model was optimized using Adam with weight decay. After each 

epoch, the learned embeddings were evaluated on the held -out positive and unlabeled 

test samples. The silhouette score  (Method M 5) based on cosine distance was used 

to quantify the separation quality of the learned prototype -aware representation space. 

The model checkpoint with the highest silhouette score was selected as the best 

prototype semi -supervised contrastive learning model. 

M5. Evaluating  metrics . The silhouette score was used to assess the quality of the 

learned embedding space and the separation of prototype clusters. For each sample, 

the silhouette coefficient compares its average intra -cluster distance  𝑎 (𝑖 ) with the 

minimum average distance to the nearest neighboring cluster  𝑏 (𝑖 ), defined as:         

> 𝑆𝑖𝑙 ℎ𝑜𝑢𝑡𝑡𝑒 𝑆𝑐𝑜𝑟𝑒 =1
> 𝑁 ∑𝑏 (𝑖 )−𝑎 (𝑖 )
> max (𝑎 (𝑖 ),𝑏 (𝑖 ))
> 𝑁
> =1
> (18 )

The score ranges from −1 to 1, where higher values indicate more compact 

clusters and better inter -cluster separation. In this study, the silhouette score was 

computed using cosine distance for consistency with the clustering metric. The optimal 

number of  clusters was selected by maximizing the average silhouette score. 

Furthermore, it was used as an indicator of representation quality, where higher scores 

reflect more discriminative and well -structured molecular embeddings. 

To evaluate both prototype similarity and prototype coverage, an entropy -

weighted prototype similarity  (EWPS)  metric was defined. Each recommended 

molecule was assigned to the prototype centroid with the highest cosine similarity, and 

the average maximum similarity was calculated as :

𝑠 ̅ = 1

𝑁  ∑ 𝑆 

> 𝑁
> =1

(19 )

where  𝑠  denotes the maximum cosine similarity between molecule  𝑖  and all prototype 

centroids. Prototype coverage was quantified using the normalized assignment 

entropy :29 

𝐻  𝑜𝑟𝑚  = − ∑ 𝑝 𝑘  𝑙𝑛 𝑝 𝑘 

> 𝐾
> 𝑘 =1

𝑙𝑛  𝐾  (20 )

where  𝑝 𝑘  is the fraction of molecules assigned to prototype  𝑘 . The final EWPS metric 

was defined as :

𝐸𝑊𝑃𝑆  = 𝑠 ̅ ∗ 𝐻  𝑜𝑟𝑚  (21 )

Higher EWPS values indicate that the recommended molecules are both highly 

representative of the learned prototypes and broadly distributed across prototype 

categories. 

To evaluate the ability of ProtoMI to recover future -reported additives, a temporal 

validation strategy was adopted. Recall was defined as :

𝑅𝑒𝑐𝑎𝑙𝑙  = 𝑁 ℎ 𝑡 

𝑁 ℎ 𝑑𝑑𝑒 

(22 )

where  𝑁 hit  is the number of hidden positive molecules recovered by the 

recommendation list and  𝑁 hidden  is the total number of hidden positives. Higher recall 

values indicate  a stronger capability for identifying future experimentally reported 

additives. 

To quantify the efficiency improvement over random screening, the enrichment 

factor (EF) was calculated as :

𝐸𝐹  = 𝑁 ℎ 𝑡  𝑁 𝑟𝑒𝑐 ⁄

𝑁 ℎ 𝑑𝑑𝑒  𝑁 𝑐𝑎 𝑑 𝑑𝑎𝑡𝑒 ⁄ (23 )

where  𝑁 rec  is the number of recommended molecules and  𝑁 candidate  is the size of 

the candidate pool. EF measures how many times the recommendation strategy 

outperforms random selection, with larger values indicating more efficient prioritization 

of experimentally promising molecules. 

M6. Translation strategy.  To further improve experimental feasibility, we designed a 

knowledge -guided post -screening pipeline based on empirical chemical constraints, 

as illustrated in  Fig. 5a . Specifically, six sequential filtering criteria were applied. First, 

CID filtration was performed by retaining only molecules with PubChem compound IDs 

(CID) smaller than 100,000,000, as larger IDs typically correspond to composite 

entries rather than sing le molecular entities. Second, molecular weight filtering was 

conducted by constraining candidates within the empirical range observed in reported 

boron -containing additives (26.811 –1455.489). Third, synthesizability was evaluated 

using the SA score, and only molecules within the dataset -derived range (2.012 –6.319) 

were preserved. Fourth, active hydrogen exclusion was implemented via  SMiles 30 

ARbitrary Target Specification  (SMARTS )-based functional group matching 65  to 

remove molecules containing labile protic hydrogens, which are known to negatively 

affect electrolyte stability and battery performance. Fifth, CAS availability was required 

to ensure that selected molecules are commercially accessible. Finally, consid ering 

practical cost constraints, we manually selected  four  molecules from  68  commercially 

available candidates for experimental validation. 

M7. Molecular representation.  In this  paper, we used  fingerprints , SMILES, and 

graphs  to represent molecules  and  use d the  augmented  molecular graph 

representation  (Method  M8) as the  best performance molecular representation 

method for  the  model training  stage.  For fingerprints, we used  the 

rdFingerprintGenerator.GetMorganGenerator ()  function in  the  RDKit Python package 

to  generate  fingerprints for all molecules with  radius=2  and  fpSize=1024 . For SMILES, 

most SMILES  can be  obtained from PubChem , OPSIN,  and  the  literature , while some 

molecules  are lacking,  and  we used ChemDraw software to  generate them manually. 

For graphs, we converted the SMILES into the molecular graph  by  encoding  atom 

elements,  the number  of heavy neighbors , formal charge, hybridization types,  whether 

it  is in a ring, whether  it  is aromatic,  scaled  van der  Waals radius , and scaled  covalent 

radius  information  as  the node features, and  bond types, bond is conjugated, bond is 

in  ring, bond direction, and bond is aromatic information as the edge features.  All 

numeric features  have been normalized to the float data type , and  all string features 

are one -hot  encoded . See the  Supplementary  Table s S2  and  S10  for details .

M8. Graph data augmentation.  To enhance the robustness of representation learning 

under limited labeled data, we employ a multi -scale graph augmentation strategy that 

perturbs molecular graphs at the feature, structure, and topology levels.  At the feature 

level, node attributes are augmented through random feature shuffling 42  and 

stochastic noise masking 39 . Feature shuffling randomly permutes a subset of node 

feature dimensions across nodes, while noise masking injects Gaussian perturbations 

into randomly selected feature entries. These operations simulate uncertainty and 

variability in molecular descriptor s.  At the structural level, graph topology is modified 

through node dropping 43  and edge perturbation 40 . Node dropping randomly removes 

a subset of nodes and their associated edges, generating subgraph -level variations. 

Edge perturbation is performed using a weighted sampling strategy, where edges are 

probabilistically removed or added based on node degree  and shortest -path distance, 

encouraging the model to learn robust local structural patterns.  At the global topology 31 

level, we further introduce a Personalized PageRank (PPR) -based augmentation 41 . A 

PPR diffusion matrix is computed to capture higher -order connectivity, and edges are 

selectively removed or added according to their PPR scores.  In particular, the  diffusion 

matrix  is  computed to capture higher -order connectivity,  defined as: 

𝑃  = 𝛼  ∑(1 − 𝛼 )𝑘 𝐴 ̂𝑘 

> 𝐾
> 𝑘 =0

(24 )

where  𝐴 ̂ = 𝐷 −1

> 2

𝐴 𝐷 −1 

> 2

is the normalized adjacency matrix , 𝐷  is the degree  matrix 

with  𝐷  = ∑ 𝐴  𝑗 𝑗  , 𝐴  is the adjacency matrix encoding the bonding topology of the 

molecular graph , 𝛼  is the teleport probability , and  𝐾  is the truncation depth.  The 

diffusion score  𝑃  𝑗  quantifies higher -order topological relationships between node  𝑖 

and node  𝑗  . Based on this score, edges with lower  𝑃  𝑗  values  are preferentially 

removed, while non -edge pairs with higher  𝑃  𝑗  values are more likely to be added. 

M9. Hierarchical  clustering algorithm  with  outlier filtering . To identify 

representative prototype groups from experimentally reported positive additives, 

hierarchical clustering was performed on the learned molecular graph embeddings 

using average linkage with cosine distance. Different clustering solutions were 

gen erated by varying the number of clusters from 3 to a predefined maximum value ,

max_cluster=10 , and the optimal cluster number  (7)  was selected according to the 

silhouette score  (Method  M5) calculated with cosine distance.  To improve the 

robustness of prototype discovery, a cluster -wise outlier filtering strategy was applied 

for each candidate clustering solution. For each cluster, the centroid was calculated 

as the mean embedding of all samples assigned to that cluster. The  cosine similarity 

between each sample embedding and its corresponding cluster centroid was then 

computed and converted into cosine distance as  1 − cos (𝑥  , 𝑐 𝑘 ), 𝑥  represents the  𝑖 th 

sample, and  𝑐 𝑘 represents the  𝑘 th  prototype centroid . Samples with distances larger 

than the cluster -specific threshold, defined as the mean distance plus 1.5 times the 

standard deviation, were regarded as outliers and removed. Clusters containing fewer 

than two samples were excluded from this filtering pro cedure.  After outlier removal, 

hierarchical clustering was recomputed on the filtered embeddings using average 

linkage and cosine distance. The silhouette score was then evaluated for each 

candidate cluster number, and the clustering configuration with the highest  score was 

selected. The corresponding filtered embeddings, cluster labels, additive names, and 

linkage matrix were retained for subsequent prototype construction and prototype -32 

guided representation learning. 

M10 . Loss function s. In this section, we introduce  two loss functions used in the pre -

trained molecular representation model and prototype semi -supervised  contrastive 

learning model, respectively. 

For the pre -trained molecular representation model,  an InfoNCE -based 

contrastive loss was adopted  to learn discriminative molecular representations. Given 

two augmented views of each molecular graph, their embeddings were first L2 -

normalized, and cosine similarity was used to measure pairwise similarity. For each 

sample, the corresponding positive pair  was encouraged to have higher similarity than 

all other samples in the batch, which  served  as negatives. The loss is defined as: 

ℒ𝐼 𝑓𝑜𝑁𝐶𝐸  = − 1

𝑁  ∑ 𝑙𝑜𝑔  exp  (𝑠𝑖𝑚 (𝑧  (1), 𝑧  (2)) 𝜏 ⁄ )

∑ exp  (𝑠𝑖𝑚  (𝑧  (1), 𝑧 𝑗 

> (2)

) 𝜏 ⁄ )𝑁 

> 𝑗 =1
> 𝑁
> =1

(25 )

where  𝜏  is a temperature parameter controlling the concentration level of the 

distribution , and  𝑧  represents the embedding of each  sample . All other samples in the 

batch are treated as negatives . The similarity function  sim (⋅,⋅) is defined as the cosine 

similarity between two embedding vectors :

𝑠𝑖𝑚 (𝑧  (1), 𝑧  (2)) = 𝑧  (1)⊤

𝑧  (2)

‖𝑧  (1)‖‖𝑧  (2)‖ = 𝑧  (1)⊤

𝑧  (2) (26 )

For the prototype semi -supervised contrastive learning model , the similarity 

between a selected molecule and its corresponding prototype was treated as the 

positive logit, while similarities to all other prototypes were treated as competing logits: 

ℒ𝑝𝑟𝑜𝑡𝑜  = − 1

𝑀  ∑ 1

| 𝑚 | ∑ 𝑙𝑜𝑔  

> 𝜖 𝑚

exp (𝑠𝑖𝑚 ( , 𝑝 𝑚 ) 𝜏 ⁄ )

∑ exp (𝑠𝑖𝑚 ( , 𝑝 𝑟 ) 𝜏 ⁄ )𝑀 

> 𝑟 =1
> 𝑀
> 𝑚 =1

(27 )

where  𝑀  is the number of prototypes , and  𝜏  = 0.1 is the temperature parameter , and , 

> 𝑚

was constructed by top -k assignment within each batch, such that molecules with 

the highest similarity to  𝑝 𝑚  were treated as positive samples for that prototype .

ℒ𝑑𝑒𝑐𝑜𝑟  = 1

𝑀 2 ∑ ∑(𝑠𝑖𝑚 (𝑝  , 𝑝 𝑗  ) − 𝛿  𝑗  )2

> 𝑀
> 𝑗 =1

, 𝛿  𝑗  = 1 𝑖𝑓  𝑖  = 𝑗 , 𝑒𝑙𝑠𝑒  0

> 𝑀
> =1

(28 )

where  𝑝  ∈ ℝ𝑑  represents the embedding vector of the  𝑖 -th prototype centroid in the 

latent space;  𝑝  ⊤𝑝 𝑗  denotes the inner product (cosine similarity after normalization) 

between prototype  𝑖  and prototype  𝑗 ; and  𝛿  𝑗  is the Kronecker delta, which equals 1 

when  𝑖  = 𝑗  and 0 otherwise.  This encourages prototypes to capture diverse and non -

overlapping molecular patterns.  The total loss was defined as the sum of the prototype 33 

contrastive loss and the prototype decorrelation loss :

ℒ𝑡𝑜𝑡𝑎𝑙  = ℒ𝑝𝑟𝑜𝑡𝑜  + ℒ𝑑𝑒𝑐𝑜𝑟  (29 )

During evaluation, prototype -relevant core samples were selected from the held -

out positive and unlabeled test molecules using the same top -k criterion, and the 

silhouette score with cosine distance was calculated on these selected embeddings. 

M11.  Electrochemical measurements . Electrochemical measurements were carried 

out using CR2025 -type LiFePO 4||graphite coin cells. The baseline electrolyte 

consisted of 1 M LiPF 6 in EC :DMC ( 3:7 by volume), with a solvent water content below 

50 ppm, and the additive -containing electrolyte was prepared by adding 1 wt% additive 

to the baseline electrolyte. The cells were assembled in an Ar -filled glovebox using 

LiFePO 4 cathodes, graphite anodes, Celgard 2025 separators and 60  μL electrolyte ,

followed by resting for 12 h before testing. The cells were cycled between 2.5 and 3.65 

V at 55  °C. Formation was conducted for three cycles at 0.33C charge and 0.33C 

discharge, followed by long -term cycling at 0.33C charge and 1C discharge. Capacity 

retention was calculated by normalizing the discharge capacity of each cycle to the 

second discharge c apacity .

M12. Post -mortem sample preparation.  The coin cells were disassembled in an Ar -

filled glovebox to avoid exposure to air and moisture. The graphite electrodes were 

carefully collected and rinsed with anhydrous DMC three times to remove residual 

electrolyte and loosely attached salts. After the residual DMC evaporated inside the 

glove box, the electrodes were mounted on the corresponding sample holders and 

transferred to the characterization chambers using an air -free vacuum transfer stage. 

M13. X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy.  XPS was performed using a PHI 

VersaProbe  4 system (ULVAC -PHI). Survey spectra and high -resolution spectra were 

collected to analyze the surface chemical composition and bonding environments of 

the SEI. The C 1s, O 1s, F 1s, P 2p, B 1s, and Fe 2p regions were analyzed when 

applicable. The binding  energies were calibrated using the C -C component in the C 

1s spectrum at 284.8 eV. Peak deconvolution was performed after background 

subtraction to determine the relative contents of different SEI components. 

M14. Time -of -flight secondary ion mass spectrometry.  ToF -SIMS measurements 

were carried out using an IONTOF M6 instrument. Negative -ion mode was mainly 

used to analyze SEI -related fragments, including PO 2⁻, CH 3CO ⁻, LiF 2⁻, CO 3⁻,

CH 3COO ⁻, and FeO ⁻. Three -dimensi onal chemical renderings and sputter -depth 34 

profiles were obtained by sequential ion analysis and sputtering. The depth profiles 

were used to compare the relative distribution of solvent -derived organic fragments, 

carbonate -containing residues, LiF -related species, phosphate/fluorophosphate -

related fragments, and Fe -containing deposits within the SEI. 

M15. Scanning electron microscopy.  SEM was conducted using an SU3900 

microscope. SEM images were collected to examine the morphology of the cycled 

graphite electrodes and the surface evolution after high -temperature cycling. 

M16. Energy -dispersive X-ray spectroscopy mapping.  EDS mapping was 

performed on the cycled graphite electrodes to analyze the spatial distribution of Fe. 

Elemental mapping was conducted on representative regions of the graphite electrode 

surface to evaluate transition -metal deposition after formation and l ong -term cycling. 

The Fe mapping results were used to compare the extent of Fe accumulation on 

graphite electrodes cycled in the baseline and additive -containing electrolytes. 

M17. Operando IR spectroscopy collection. 

Operando infrared measurements were conducted using a Bruker Invenio R

spectrometer equipped with a customized electrochemical cell containing an 

embedded IR fiber. The manually polished fiber was inserted through symmetric 

through -holes and sealed with ep oxy resin for 12 h. The cell was assembled by 

sequentially stacking a graphite electrode, the IR fiber, a Whatman GF/D separator 

wetted with 120  μL electrolyte, and an LFP electrode with a diameter of 12 mm within 

a PTFE stabilizing ring. After a 1  h rest,  transmitted IR signals were collected by a 

liquid -nitrogen -cooled MCT detector over 5000 -600 cm -1. Spectra were acquired every 

1 min during cycling at a resolution of 4  cm -1 with 32 scans, while maintaining the signal 

intensity at approximately 10,000 to  ensure a high signal -to -noise ratio. 35 

## Acknowledgments 

The authors  are grateful for  the National Natural Science Foundation of China (No. 

92372109 ), the National Key R&D Program of China (No. 2023YFB2503600), and 

Guangdong S&T Program (No. 2025A0505000017). The authors thank the Materials, 

Design and Manufacturing Facility (MDMF), Materials Characterization and 

Preparation Facility (MCPF), and Wilso n Tang Brilliant Energy Science and 

Technology Lab (BEST Lab) of The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology 

(Guangzhou) for providing experimental support. This work is partially supported by 

GDIC. 

## Author contributions 

W.H. conceived the project, designed the methodology, collected the data, developed 

the model, performed the data analysis, prepared the figures, and wrote the  paper ,

with participation in electrochemical testing and materials characterization.  H.D. 

performed all electrochemical measurements , materials characterization experiments ,

and  wrote the experimental part of the paper . J.T. contributed to the conceptualization 

of the project.  R.T. provided guidance on model development and algorithm design. 

J.L. supervised the computational work and contributed to  paper  revision.  Y.Q. 

supervised the  paper  preparation and provided theoretical guidance on boron 

chemistry.  J.H. conceived and supervised the overall project and contributed to 

refinement of the  paper  and figure s. All authors discussed the results and contributed 

to the final  paper .

## Competing interests 

A Chinese patent application related to this work has been filed and is currently 

pending .

## Data and code availability 

The source code used in this study is publicly available at 

https://github.com/HongWxd/ProtoMI. The datasets generated and analyzed during 

the current study are available from the corresponding author upon reasonable 

request .36 

## References 

1 Armand, M. & Tarascon, J. -M. Building better batteries.  Nature  451 , 652 -657 (2008). 

2 Yang, X., Zhang, H., Liu, Q. & Jiang, G. The Li -ion battery industry and its challenges.  Nature 

Reviews Chemistry  9, 497 -498 (2025). 

3 Fan, X. & Wang, C. High -voltage liquid electrolytes for Li batteries: progress and perspectives. 

Chemical Society Reviews  50 , 10486 -10566 (2021). 

4 Wan, H., Xu, J. & Wang, C. Designing electrolytes  and interphases for high -energy lithium 

batteries.  Nature Reviews Chemistry  8, 30 -44 (2024). 

5 Palací n, M. R. & de Guibert, A. Why do batteries fail?  Science  351 , 1253292 (2016). 

6 Zhang, S. S. A review on electrolyte additives for lithium -ion batteries.  Journal of Power 

Sources  162 , 1379 -1394 (2006). 

7 Pandey, M.  et al.  The transformational role of GPU computing and deep learning in drug 

discovery.  Nature Machine Intelligence  4, 211 -221 (2022). 

8 Jumper, J.  et al.  Highly accurate protein structure prediction with AlphaFold.  Nature  596 , 583 -

589 (2021). 

9 Gao, Y. -C.  et al.  Accelerating battery innovation: AI -powered molecular discovery.  Chemical 

Society Reviews  54 , 9630 -9684 (2025). 

10  Gao, Y. -C.  et al.  Data -Driven Insight into the Reductive Stability of Ion –Solvent Complexes in 

Lithium Battery Electrolytes.  Journal of the American Chemical Society  145 , 23764 -23770 

(2023). 

11  Gao, X.  et al.  Generative Artificial Intelligence Navigated Development of Solvents for Next 

Generation High -Performance Magnesium Batteries.  Advanced Materials  38 , e10083 (2026). 

12  Li, H., Hao, J. & Qiao, S. -Z. AI -Driven Electrolyte Additive Selection to Boost Aqueous Zn -Ion 

Batteries Stability.  Advanced Materials  36 , 2411991 (2024). 

13  Lao, Z.  et al.  Data -driven exploration of weak coordination microenvironment in solid -state 

electrolyte for safe and energy -dense batteries.  Nature Communications  16 , 1075 (2025). 

14  Xie, T.  et al.  Accelerating amorphous polymer electrolyte screening by learning to reduce errors 

in molecular dynamics simulated properties.  Nature Communications  13  (2022). 

15  Li, K., Wang, J., Song, Y. & Wang, Y. Machine learning -guided discovery of ionic polymer 

electrolytes for lithium metal batteries.  Nature Communications  14  (2023). 

16  Wang, F., Tang, Y. -H., Ma, Z. -B., Jin, Y. -C. & Cheng, J. Domain oriented universal machine 

learning potential enables fast exploration of chemical space of battery electrolytes.  Nature 

Communications  17  (2025). 

17  Gao, Y. C.  et al.  A Knowledge –Data Dual ‐Driven Framework for Predicting the Molecular 

Properties of Rechargeable Battery Electrolytes.  Angewandte Chemie International Edition  64 

(2024). 

18  Zou, B. -B.  et al.  Decoding Lithium Metal Battery Degradation with Symmetric -Cell Artificial 

Intelligence Diagnostics (SAID).  Advanced Materials  38 , e12041 (2026). 

19  Ma, P., Kumar, R., Wang, K. -H. & Amanchukwu, C. V. Active learning accelerates electrolyte 

solvent screening for anode -free lithium metal batteries.  Nature Communications  16  (2025). 

20  Hong, X.  et al.  Deep active learning and knowledge transfer for rapid discovery of lithium metal 

battery electrolytes.  Nature Communications  17 , 5146 (2026). 

21  Zhu, S.  et al.  Differentiable modeling and optimization of non -aqueous Li -based battery 

electrolyte solutions using geometric deep learning.  Nature Communications  15  (2024). 

22  Li, R.  et al.  Data -driven design of advanced magnesium -battery electrolyte via dynamic 

solvation models.  Energy & Environmental Science  18 , 6790 -6798 (2025). 

23  Ma, L.  et al.  Designing Bilayer Heterostructure Functional Polymer Electrolytes with Interfacial 

Engineering Strategy for High ‐Performance Lithium Metal Batteries.  Advanced Functional 

Materials  35 , 2414816 (2025). 

24  Park, N. R.  et al.  Understanding Boron Chemistry as the Surface Modification and Electrolyte 

Additive for Co -Free Lithium -Rich Layered Oxide.  Advanced Energy Materials  14 , 2401968 

(2024). 

25  Yu, Y.  et al.  Enable reversible conversion reaction of copper fluoride batteries by hydroxyl 

solution and anion acceptor.  Energy Storage Materials  64 , 103073 (2024). 37 

26  Deng, T.  et al.  Designing In -Situ -Formed Interphases Enables Highly Reversible Cobalt -Free 

LiNiO2 Cathode for Li -ion and Li -metal Batteries.  Joule  3, 2550 -2564 (2019). 

27  Cherti, M.  et al.  in  2023 IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition 

(CVPR)  2818 -2829 (2023). 

28  Jin, J., Wang, S., Dong, Z., Liu, X. & Zhu, E. in  2023 IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision 

and Pattern Recognition (CVPR)  11600 -11609 (2023). 

29  Rao, H. & Miao, C. in  2023 IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition 

(CVPR)  22118 -22128 (2023). 

30  Yang, X., Song, Z., King, I. & Xu, Z. A Survey on Deep Semi -Supervised Learning.  IEEE 

Transactions on Knowledge and Data Engineering  35 , 8934 -8954 (2023). 

31  Kim, S.  et al.  PubChem 2025 update.  Nucleic acids research  53 , D1516 -D1525 (2025). 

32  Azam, S.  et al.  Improving and Understanding Lifetime of LFP/Graphite Pouch Cells with Higher 

Concentrations of Vinylene Carbonate in the Electrolyte.  Journal of The Electrochemical 

Society  172 , 070523 (2025). 

33  Black, W., Azam, S., MacLennan, H., Metzger, M. & Dahn, J. R. Understanding Capacity Loss 

in LFP/Graphite Pouch Cells at High Temperatures through Modelling.  Journal of the 

Electrochemical Society  172 , 090503 (2025). 

34  McInnes, L., Healy, J. & Melville, J. Umap: Uniform manifold approximation and projection for 

dimension reduction.  arXiv preprint arXiv:1802.03426  (2018). 

35  Rogers, D. & Hahn, M. Extended -connectivity fingerprints.  Journal of Chemical Information and 

Modeling  50 , 742 -754 (2010). 

36  Murtagh, F. & Contreras, P. Algorithms for hierarchical clustering: an overview.  WIREs Data 

Mining and Knowledge Discovery  2, 86 -97 (2011). 

37  Ertl, P. & Schuffenhauer, A. Estimation of synthetic accessibility score of drug -like molecules 

based on molecular complexity and fragment contributions.  Journal of Cheminformatics  1

(2009). 

38  Hu, H., Wang, X., Zhang, Y., Chen, Q. & Guan, Q. A comprehensive survey on contrastive 

learning.  Neurocomputing  610  (2024). 

39  Pinheiro, G. A., Da Silva, J. L. F. & Quiles, M. G. SMICLR: Contrastive Learning on Multiple 

Molecular Representations for Semisupervised and Unsupervised Representation Learning. 

Journal of Chemical Information and Modeling  62 , 3948 -3960 (2022). 

40  Wang, Y.  et al.  in  Proceedings of the 26th ACM SIGKDD International Conference on 

Knowledge Discovery & Data Mining  207 -217 (2020). 

41  Page, L., Brin, S., Motwani, R. & Winograd, T. in  The Web Conference. 

42  Zhu, Y.  et al.  in  Proceedings of the Web Conference 2021  2069 -2080 (2021). 

43  You, Y.  et al.  Graph contrastive learning with augmentations.  Advances in neural information 

processing systems  33 , 5812 -5823 (2020). 

44  Cereto -Massagué , A.  et al.  Molecular fingerprint similarity search in virtual screening.  Methods 

71 , 58 -63 (2015). 

45  Weininger, D. SMILES, a chemical language and information system. 1. Introduction to 

methodology and encoding rules.  Journal of chemical information and computer sciences  28 ,

31 -36 (1988). 

46  Rousseeuw, P. Silhouettes: a graphical aid to the interpretation and validation of cluster 

analysis.  J. Comput. Appl. Math.  20 , 53 –65 (1987). 

47  Zhang, H., Lu, G., Zhan, M. & Zhang, B. Semi -Supervised Classification of Graph Convolutional 

Networks with Laplacian Rank Constraints.  Neural Process. Lett.  54 , 2645 –2656 (2022). 

48  Lin, L. & Wang, H. in  Proceedings of the 26th ACM SIGKDD International Conference on 

Knowledge Discovery & Data Mining  1819 –1827 (Association for Computing Machinery, 

Virtual Event, CA, USA, 2020). 

49  You, Y.  et al.  in  Proceedings of the 34th International Conference on Neural Information 

Processing Systems  Article 488 (Curran Associates Inc., Vancouver, BC, Canada, 2020). 

50  Likas, A., Vlassis, N. & Verbeek, J. J. The global k -means clustering algorithm.  Pattern 

recognition  36 , 451 -461 (2003). 38 

51  Xue, Z. -M., Zhao, J. -F., Ding, J. & Chen, C. -H. LBDOB, a new lithium salt with benzenediolato 

and oxalato complexes of boron for lithium battery electrolytes.  Journal of Power Sources  195 ,

853 -856 (2010). 

52  Nie, M., Xia, J. & Dahn, J. Development of pyridine -boron trifluoride electrolyte additives for 

lithium -ion batteries.  Journal of The Electrochemical Society  162 , A1186 -A1195 (2015). 

53  Ma, Y.  et al.  A new anion receptor for improving the interface between lithium -and manganese -

rich layered oxide cathode and the electrolyte.  Chemistry of Materials  29 , 2141 -2149 (2017). 

54  Xi, K.  et al.  A novel strategy to improve the electrochemical properties of in -situ polymerized 1, 

3-dioxolane electrolyte in lithium metal batteries.  Journal of Colloid and Interface Science  679 ,

1277 -1287 (2025). 

55  Morales -Brotons, D., Vogels, T. & Hendrikx, H. Exponential Moving Average of Weights in Deep 

Learning: Dynamics and Benefits.  Trans. Mach. Learn. Res.  2024  (2024). 

56  Zhang, J.  et al.  Worse Interference of Fe3+ than Fe2+ on Degrading the Interphase and 

Performance of LiFePO4||Graphite Battery.  Advanced Materials  37 , e13736 (2025). 

57  Dedryvè re, R.  et al.  Characterization of lithium alkyl carbonates by X -ray photoelectron 

spectroscopy: experimental and theoretical study.  The Journal of Physical Chemistry B  109 ,

15868 -15875 (2005). 

58  Sim, R., Su, L., Dolocan, A. & Manthiram, A. Delineating the Impact of Transition ‐Metal 

Crossover on Solid ‐Electrolyte Interphase Formation with Ion Mass Spectrometry.  Advanced 

Materials  36 , 2311573 (2024). 

59  Ota, H., Akai, T., Namita, H., Yamaguchi, S. & Nomura, M. XAFS and TOF –SIMS analysis of 

SEI layers on electrodes.  Journal of Power Sources  119 -121 , 567 -571 (2003). 

60  Wang, A., Kadam, S., Li, H., Shi, S. & Qi, Y. Review on modeling of the anode solid electrolyte 

interphase (SEI) for lithium -ion batteries.  npj Computational Materials  4, 15 (2018). 

61  Xu, H.  et al.  Impacts of dissolved Ni2+ on the solid electrolyte interphase on a graphite anode. 

Angewandte Chemie  134 , e202202894 (2022). 

62  Guo, Z., Cui, Z. & Manthiram, A. Crossover Effects of Transition ‐Metal Ions on Lithium ‐Metal 

Anode in Localized High Concentration Electrolytes.  Advanced Functional Materials  35 ,

2501743 (2025). 

63  Wang, D.  et al.  Revealing the lithium solid electrolyte interphase in liquid electrolytes via in situ 

Fourier transform infrared spectroscopy.  Cell Press Blue  (2026). 

64  Wang, Y.  et al.  Formation dynamics of an ethylene carbonate -derived solid –electrolyte -

interphase in commercial Li -ion batteries.  Energy & Environmental Science  (2026). 

65  Zhang, C.  et al.  Small Molecule Accurate Recognition Technology (SMART) to Enhance 

Natural Products Research.  Scientific Reports  7 (2017). 1

# Supplementary information 

# Prototype -guided transfer of sparse literature 

# knowledge for electrolyte additive discovery 

Weixiang HONG 1, 5, Hongting DU 1, 5, Jiayue TANG 1, Ruifeng TAN 1, Yangjian 

QUAN 2, Jia LI 3,* , Jiaqiang HUANG 1, 4,*  

> 1

Sustainable Energy and Environment Thrust  and  Guangzhou Municipal Key Laboratory of 

Materials Informatics, The Hong Kong University of  Science and Technology (Guangzhou), 

Nansha, Guangzhou, 511400,  Guangdong, P.R. China  

> 2

Department of Chemistry, The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology, Clear 

Water Bay, Kowloon, Hong Kong SAR, P.R. China  

> 3

Data Science and Analytics Thrust  and  Guangzhou Municipal Key Laboratory of Materials 

Informatics, The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology (Guangzhou), Nansha, 

Guangzhou, 511400, Guangdong, P.R. China  

> 4

Academy of Interdisciplinary Studies, The Hong Kong University of Science and 

Technology, Clear Water Bay, Kowloon,  Hong Kong SAR, P.R. China  

> 5

These authors contributed equally: Weixiang HONG, Hongting DU 

* Corresponding authors: 

J. Huang:  seejhuang@ hkust -gz.edu.cn 

J. Li:  jialee@ hkust -gz.edu.cn 2

Fig ure  S1 | Hierarchical clustering 1 dendrogram  of reported boron -containing electrolyte additives .

Hierarchical clustering dendrogram of 126 reported boron -containing electrolyte additives constructed using Morgan 

fingerprints and pairwise Tanimoto distances 2. Each terminal leaf represents one reported additive, and the branch 

height reflects molecular dissimilarity. Even with this simple fingerprint -based representation, additives with highly 

similar names and closely related chemical structures are grouped i nto the same local branches, such as families 

of lithium borates, fluorinated borates and aryl borate derivatives. This branch -level organization suggests that 

reported boron -containing additives are not randomly scattered as isolated successful examples,  but are enriched 

in recurrent structural families. These repeated local branches therefore support the presence of recurring molecular 

patterns or scaffold -level motifs in the reported additive chemical space. Branch colors are used to visually 

distinguish  major dendrogram regions generated by hierarchical clustering. 

Table S 1 | Dataset statistics 

Category  Value 

Atoms  41.191±47.281 

Bonds  87.259±102.386 

Average degree  4.130±0.432 

Graph density  0.189±0.117 

Degree entropy  3.265±0.802 

These  statistics  were  calculated from both reported molecules and the searching space molecules. 3 

> Table S 2| Node features and corresponding physical meanings

Feature No.  Physical Meaning  Feature type  Encoding type  Data type 

N0  C Node feature  One hot encoding  String 

N1  N Node feature  One hot encoding  String 

N2  O Node feature  One hot encoding  String 

N3  S Node feature  One hot encoding  String 

N4  F Node feature  One hot encoding  String 

N5  Si  Node feature  One hot encoding  String 

N6  P Node feature  One hot encoding  String 

N7  Cl  Node feature  One hot encoding  String 

N8  Br  Node feature  One hot encoding  String 

N9  Mg  Node feature  One hot encoding  String 

N10  Na  Node feature  One hot encoding  String 

N11  Ca  Node feature  One hot encoding  String 

N12  Fe  Node feature  One hot encoding  String 

N13  As  Node feature  One hot encoding  String 

N14  Al  Node feature  One hot encoding  String 

N15  I Node feature  One hot encoding  String 

N16  B Node feature  One hot encoding  String 

N17  V Node feature  One hot encoding  String 

N18  K Node feature  One hot encoding  String 

N19  TI  Node feature  One hot encoding  String 

N20  Yb  Node feature  One hot encoding  String 

N21  Sb  Node feature  One hot encoding  String 

N22  Sn  Node feature  One hot encoding  String 

N23  Ag  Node feature  One hot encoding  String 

N24  Pd  Node feature  One hot encoding  String 

N25  Co  Node feature  One hot encoding  String 

N26  Se  Node feature  One hot encoding  String 

N27  Ti  Node feature  One hot encoding  String 

N28  Zn  Node feature  One hot encoding  String 

N29  Li  Node feature  One hot encoding  String 

N30  Ge  Node feature  One hot encoding  String 

N31  Cu  Node feature  One hot encoding  String 

N32  Au  Node feature  One hot encoding  String 

N33  Ni  Node feature  One hot encoding  String 

N34  Cd  Node feature  One hot encoding  String 

N35  In  Node feature  One hot encoding  String 

N36  Mn  Node feature  One hot encoding  String 

N37  Zr  Node feature  One hot encoding  String 4

N38  Cr  Node feature  One hot encoding  String 

N39  Pt  Node feature  One hot encoding  String 

N40  Hg  Node feature  One hot encoding  String 

N4  Pb  Node feature  One hot encoding  String 

N42  Unknown element  Node feature  One hot encoding  String 

N43  n_heavy_neighbors_0  Node feature  One hot encoding  String 

N44  n_heavy_neighbors_1  Node feature  One hot encoding  String 

N45  n_heavy_neighbors_2  Node feature  One hot encoding  String 

N46  n_heavy_neighbors_3  Node feature  One hot encoding  String 

N47  n_heavy_neighbors_4  Node feature  One hot encoding  String 

N48  n_heavy_neighbors_More 

ThanFour 

Node feature  One hot encoding  String 

N49  formal_charge_ -3 Node feature  One hot encoding  String 

N50  formal_charge_ -2 Node feature  One hot encoding  String 

N51  formal_charge_ -1 Node feature  One hot encoding  String 

N52  formal_charge_0  Node feature  One hot encoding  String 

N53  formal_charge_1  Node feature  One hot encoding  String 

N54  formal_charge_2  Node feature  One hot encoding  String 

N55  formal_charge_3  Node feature  One hot encoding  String 

N56  formal_charge_Extreme  Node feature  One hot encoding  String 

N57  S Node feature  One hot encoding  String 

N58  SP  Node feature  One hot encoding  String 

N59  SP2  Node feature  One hot encoding  String 

N60  SP3  Node feature  One hot encoding  String 

N61  SP3D  Node feature  One hot encoding  String 

N62  SP3D2  Node feature  One hot encoding  String 

N63  Other hybridization  Node feature  One hot encoding  String 

N64  is_in_a_ring  Node feature  Numerical  Int 

N65  is_aromatic  Node feature  Numerical  Int 

N66  atomic_mass_scaled  Node feature  Numerical  Float 

N67  vdw_radius_scaled  Node feature  Numerical  Float 

N68  covalent_radius_scaled  Node feature  Numerical  Float 

N69  CHI_UNSPECIFIED  Node feature  One hot encoding  String 

N70  CHI_TETRAHEDRAL_CW  Node feature  One hot encoding  String 

N71  CHI_TETRAHEDRAL_CC 

W

Node feature  One hot encoding  String 

N72  CHI_OTHER  Node feature  One hot encoding  String 

N73  n_hydrogens_0  Node feature  One hot encoding  String 

N74  n_hydrogens_1  Node feature  One hot encoding  String 

N75  n_hydrogens_2  Node feature  One hot encoding  String 

N76  n_hydrogens_3  Node feature  One hot encoding  String 5

N77  n_hydrogens_4  Node feature  One hot encoding  String 

N78  n_hydrogens_MoreThanF 

our 

Node feature  One hot encoding  String 

Fig ure  S2 | Selection of the optimal number of molecular prototype . Average silhouette scores of hierarchical 

clustering and K -means 3 clustering evaluated for cluster numbers ranging from 3 to 15. The optimal number of 

molecular prototypes was determined using the silhouette score, which measures the compactness and 

separation of molecular clusters. Hierarchical clustering achieved the  highest silhouette score at k = 7, while K -

means clustering showed a consistent optimum in the same region. Therefore, seven molecular prototypes were 

selected in a data -driven manner and used throughout this study for unsupervised prototype discovery and 

subsequent prototype -guided learning. 

Figure S3 | UMAP 4 visual ization of  the reported boron electrolyte additive molecules  learned  by the UCL 

model.  UMAP projection of the learned graph -level embeddings of reported boron -containing electrolyte additives. 

Each point represents one reported additive molecule, and colors denote the prototype assignments obtained by 6

hierarchical clustering in the learned representation space. The seven well -separated groups indicate that the UCL 

model organizes reported additives into distinct molecular prototype regions, consistent with the optimal cluster 

number determined by silhou ette -score analysis in Supplementary Fig ure  S2. The spatial separation of the clusters 

supports the presence of structurally and functionally distinguishable additive prototypes encoded in the learned 

embedding space. 

Table  S3 | Reported additive molecules  in each prototypes .

Molecular 

ID  Molecular name  Molecules  Molecular 

weight 

Synthetic 

accessibility 

Score 5

Prototype 

label  References 

6 TBDB  225.890  4.273  1 6

10  ITD  186.060  3.616  1 7

12  SOFPB  352.331  2.987  1 8

14  DPD -CN -OCH3  245.087  3.159  1 9

19  C-LiMCFB  317.089  4.211  1 10 

24  NHCABT  167.971  3.293  1 11 

32  DPD  190.051  2.893  1 9

43  BF3 -THF  139.913  5.532  1 12 7

59  DiOB -Py  205.066  2.853  1 13 

66  BEG -1 412.185  4.069  1 14 

83  DPD -CN  215.061  3.159  1 9

92  DPD -F 208.041  2.98  1 9

95  BDB  253.944  3.428  1 15 

98  DPD -CHO  218.061  3.128  1 9

104  DPD -COOCH2CH3  262.114  2.852  1 9

116  DiOB -An  275.201  2.699  1 13 

3 PFPBO  265.886  3.559  2 16 

34  DCLBSB  427.745  4.164  2 17 

45  TFPBO  559.977  2.965  2 18 8

51  LiBBrSB  462.792  4.368  2 19 

54  PFPTFBB  357.924  3.393  2 20 

56  TPFPB  511.980  2.800  2 21 

75  TPF  511.980  2.800  2 22 

77  TFPB  511.980  2.800  2 18 

94  TCLBSB  496.635  4.388  2 17 

109  4FLBDOB  285.827  4.647  2 23 

115  LiBClSB  373.89  4.260  2 19 

122  LiBCl2SB  442.78  4.355  2 19 

4 LiPVAOB  221.931  5.608  3 24 

30  ADM  170.961  3.811  3 25 9

36  LiODFB  143.767  4.662  3 26 

37  LiPAAOB  278.959  4.432  3 27 

52  LBDCB  265.899  5.246  3 28 

61  LDFOB  143.767  4.662  3 29 

67  LBCB  297.853  5. 653  3 28 

69  NaDFOB  159.816  4.729  3 30 

73  LiBOB  193.789  4.913  3 19 

101  LiMOB  221.843  4.983  3 31 

102  LiBMAB  301.973  4.961  3 32 

105  LOCB  245.821  5.846  3 28 10 

110  LiBF4  193.789  4.913  3 29 

112  LiDFOB  143.767  4.662  3 33 

5 (C6H3F)O2B(C8H3 

F6)  349.998  3.089  4 34 

8 LBBPB  386.141  3.111  4 35 

9 TPhBX  311.751  2.739  4 36 

15  (C6H3F)O2B(C6H3 

F2)  249.984  2.911  4 34 

18  LBSB  289.965  3.837  4 17 

28  LBNB  334.065  3.487  4 35 

50  (C6H3F)O2B(C7H4 

F3)  282.001  2.880  4 34 

55  (C6F4)O2B(C6F5)  234.010  2.888  4 34 

60  (C6F4)O2B(C8H3F 

6)  351.006  3.059  4 34 11 

70  LBDOB  233.945  3.733  4 37 

76  LBBB  233.945  3.733  4 35 

82  (C6F4)O2B(C7H3F 

6)  283.009  2.906  4 34 

84  LiBPh4  326.177  2.093  4 38 

85  3-MLBSB  318.019  4.029  4 17 

88  (C6F4)O2B(C6H4F)  233.002  2.742  4 34 

89  Li[BScB]  289.965  3.837  4 39 

97  B(OPh)3  290.127  2.012  4 40 

107  LiBSB  289.965  3.837  4 19 

113  (C6F4)O2B(C6H3F 

2)  250.992  2.873  4 34 

7 TRIFM  214.905  2.601  5 41 12 

11  LBO  49.751  5.870  5 42 

21  Li2TB  169.123  6.757  5 43 

33  PRZ  215.702  4.900  5 44 

35  H3BO3  61.833  3.432  5 45 

38  FBA  189.929  2.415  5 46 

41  Li3BO3  65.750  6.320  5 47 

44  B2O3  263811  5.773  5 48 

57  LiBO2  65.750  6.320  5 49 

58  TEB  65.750  6.320  5 50 

65  TMSPB  194.115  2.914  5 51 

71  MDMB  192.067  2.911  5 52 13 

74  3F -PBF  164.898  3.899  5 41 

78  LUTID  174.962  3.700  5 41 

86  PBF  146.908  2.415  5 41 

91  TRIZIN  284.496  5.317  5 53 

96  K2B4O5(OH)4  704.412  6.036  5 54 

103  VPBF  172.946  2.874  5 41 

106  DEBA  99.926  4.079  5 55 

111  PCN  171.918  2.711  5 41 

121  LiB5AB  385.906  3.065  5 56 

124  2F -PBF  164.898  2.703  5 41 

13  (C3HF6O)2B(C6H5 

) 421.974  3.417  6 34 14 

17  THFBuBO  607.947  3.432  6 57 

25  (C3HF6O)2B(C6F5)  440.972  3.547  6 34 

31  (C3HF6O)2B(C6H3 

F2)  457.954  3.594  6 34 

46  TFEB  307.905  3.422  6 43 

63  B(HFIP)3  511.896  3.443  6 58 

68  Na[B(hfip)4]  701.914  3.743  6 59 

90  THFB  511.896  3.687  6 57 

93  TTFEB  307.905  3.422  6 60 

99  TMF  613.863  3.644  6 22 

108  TTFB  307.905  3.422  6 61 

119  ABA#1  511.896  3.443  6 62 15 

123  THFPB  511.896  3.443  6 63 

125  THB  511.896  3.443  6 64 

0 TMSB  278.382  3.985  7 65 

1 TCEB  221.025  3.847  7 66 

2 TMBx  173.535  5.202  7 67 

16  TiPBx  257.697  4.618  7 67 

20  L-LiMCFB  326.046  3.152  7 10 

22  TME  188.076  3.621  7 22 

26  HBC  1455.489  4.462  7 68 

27  TnPBx  257.697  4.219  7 67 

29  LBC  1059.012  3.722  7 68 16 

40  LiT4PAB  414.189  3.856  7 69 

47  BF3·DE  141.929  2.963  7 70 

48  BPC  1060.984  3.801  7 71 

64  TPB  188.076  3.388  7 72 

72  TAB  342.197  3.497  7 73 

79  TMB  125.538  5.382  7 74 

80  B-HEMA  398.217  3.249  7 68 

100  PBA  137.931  2.255  7 75 

114  TBB  230.157  2.858  7 76 

117  TEBx  215.616  4.804  7 67 

The missing compound ID was filtered out as an outlier during the clustering process. 

Table S 4 | Shared motif summary table 17 

Legend  in Fig . 3e Motif name  Motif structure  Appears in the 

prototype 

P1 -SM  C-B(OR )2 motif  P1, P2, P3, P4, P5, P6 

P2 -SM  Pentafluorophenyl  group  P2 

P3 -SM  Boron  oxalate  P2, P3 

P4 -SM  Catechol  boronate  P2, P3, P4 

P5 -SM  BF3 -like  motif  P1, P5, P7 

P6 -SM  Fluorinated  alkoxy  P6 

P7 -SM  Tri -alkoxy  borate  P1, P2, P3, P4, P5, P6, 

P7 

8-SM  Tetra -alkoxy  borate  P2, P3, P4, P6, P7  

> The shared molecular framework was identified using the SMART 77 method. 18

Fig ure  S4 | Mechanism annotation statistics of the seven learned molecular prototypes.  Quantitative 

mechanism annotation supporting the functional profiles in Fig. 3c. Heatmap showing the normalized frequency of 

seven electrolyte -regulation mechanisms across the seven learned molecular prototypes. Frequencies were 

calculated by dividing the  number of mechanism -related records by the total number of annotated records in each 

prototype. 

Table S 5 | Prototype s summary  table 

Prototype  Number of 

molecules  Representative molecule  Dominant motifs 

P1  89  DiOB -Py  C-B(OR)2 motif 

P2  64  TPFPB  pentafluorophenyl 

group 

P3  78  LiDFOB  tetra -alkoxy borate 

P4  117  LBBB  catechol boronate 

P5  131  PCN  BF3 -like motif 

P6  92  TTFEB  fluorinated alkoxy 

P7  109  TBB  tri -alkoxy borate 

The population is calculated  after the graph augmentation. 19 

Figure S 5 | Prototype correspondence between initial and transferred prototype centroids . Heatmap showing 

the mean cosine similarity between the initial prototype centroids at epoch 1 and the transferred prototype centroids 

after PCL training at epoch 300. Rows denote transferred prototypes, and columns denote initial prototypes. The 

strong dia gonal similarity indicates that most transferred prototypes preserve clear correspondence with their initial 

prototype identities, whereas structured off -diagonal similarities reflect partial reorganization and information sharing 

among related prototype r egions during adaptation. These results support that PCL maintains prototype -level 

continuity while allowing the prototype organization to adjust to the unlabeled candidate chemical space. 20 

Figure S 6 | Structural motif distribution across transferred prototypes . Stacked bar plot showing the 

distribution of representative boron -containing structural motifs across transferred prototypes after PCL adaptation. 

Motif proportions were calculated from molecules assigned to each new prototype using predefined  SMiles ARbitrary 

Target Specification  (SMARTS ) patterns, including tetra -alkoxy borate, tri -alkoxy borate, boron oxalate, BF 3-like 

motifs, fluorinated alkoxy groups, C -B(OR) 2 motifs, pentafluorophenyl groups and catechol boronate. The 

enrichment of different motifs in distinct transferred prototypes indicates that PCL preserves chemically meaningful 

structural information during prototype adaptation rather than forming arbitra ry clusters in the candidate space. 

Because a molecule may contain more than one motif, stacked heights represent cumulative motif occurrence rather 

than mutually exclusive molecular classes. 

Fig ure  S7 | Distribution of prototype similarity across recommendation strategies . Violin plots showing the 

distribution of molecule -level prototype similarity for molecules recommended by different strategies after  translation 

strategy . Each point represents one recommended molecule, and box plots indicate the median and interquartile 

range. ProtoMI shows the highest overall prototype similarity among the compared strategies, indicating that 

prototype -guided adaptation enriches molecule s that remain close to the learned additive prototype regions. The 

red star highlights ProtoMI  achieves the highest prototype similarity among all recommendation methods .21 

Fig ure  S8 | Prototype occupancy of molecules recommended by different strategies . Heatmap showing the 

occupancy of recommended molecules across the seven learned molecular prototypes after  translation strategy .

Rows correspond to different recommendation strategies, and columns correspond to assigned prototypes P1 –P7. 

Values indicate the percentage of molecules assigned to each prototype within a given strategy, with each row 

normalized to 100%. ProtoMI distrib utes recommended molecules across multiple prototype regions while retaining 

high prototype similarity, suggesting that the model avoids collapse into a single prototype and preserves chemically 

diverse recommendation coverage. 

Fig ure  S9 | Similarity of recommended molecules to reported additives . Distribution of the maximum structural 

similarity between recommended molecules and reported boron -containing electrolyte additives across different 

recommendation strategies. Each violin plot shows the molecule -level known -additive similarity after post -screening, 

with box plots indicating the median and interquartile range. ProtoMI exhibits a broad similarity distribution, including 

both candidates close to reported additives and candidates with lower similarity, suggesting that the model transfers 

protot ype -level chemical knowledge without simply reproducing close analogues of known molecules. P1 P2 P3 P4 P5 P6 P7 

Assigned prototype 

ProtoMI PCL encoder 

PCL clustering 

USL encoder USL clustering Morgan Random Recommendation strategy 

21.1 5.6 8.5 0.0 23.9 40.8 0.0 

3.0 38.9 0.0 0.0 0.0 58.2 0.0 6.5 1.2 2.9 0.0 5.3 78.9 5.3 0.0 26.4 0.0 0.0 0.1 71.3 2.2 

0.0 0.6 83.2 0.6 0.0 0.0 15.5 5.8 18.3 4.4 6.8 3.2 32.6 29.0 

4.8 11.6 3.7 0.5 4.6 71.7 3.1 

010 20 

30 

40 50 60 70 

80 Occupancy (  )22   

> Table S 6| Extra recommendation statistics

Method 

Entropy -

weighted 

prototype 

similarity 

Novelty 

score 

High 

similarity 

ratio >0.75 

Moderate 

similarity 

ratio 0.40 -

0.75 

Low 

similarity 

ratio <0.40 

Post -

screening 

survival 

Random 

selection  27.637  0.6435 ± 

0.0910  0.62%  24.42%  74.96%  2.10% 

Morgan 

fingerprints  41.600  0.6304 ± 

0.0875  0.75%  29.10%  70.15%  5.18% 

UCL encoder 

only  2.985  0.6323 ± 

0.0889  0.43%  30.70%  68.87%  5.26% 

PCL encoder 

only  29.466  0.6206 ± 

0.1127  1.73%  29.21%  69.06%  1.31% 

UCL encoder 

clustering  2.079  0.6762 ± 

0.0607  0.00%  10.32%  89.68%  0.50% 

PCL encoder 

clustering  24.364  0.6551 ± 

0.0744  0.00%  22.29%  77.71%  1.10% 

ProtoMI  57.121  0.5975 ± 

0.2446  12.68%  25.35%  61.97%  0.23% 

w/o EMA  9.456  0.6722 ± 

0.1029  1.22%  12.91%  85.86%  1.86% 

w/o 

decorrelation  0.299  0.6270 ± 

0.0817  0.75%  30.21%  69.04%  5.65% 

w/o top -k 0.000  0.6558 ± 

0.2060  7.07%  23.91%  69.02%  0.96%  

> Table S 7| Full temporal validation

Cutoff year  Recall  Precision  F1 score  Enrichment 

factor 

Reduction 

factor  Hit number 

2017  0.10638  0.00274  0.00535  10.52583  98.94282  5/47 

2019  0.11627  0.00219  0.00430  9.18278  78.97191  5/43 

2021  0.08823  0.00862  0.01570  45.63311  517.17528  3/34 

2023  0.20000  0.00484  0.00946  43.63078  218.15393  4/20 23 

Fig ure  S10 | Prototype survival during translation from model recommendations to experimentally 

actionable candidates . Sankey diagram showing the retention and redistribution of new prototype assignments 

during the translation strategy from PCL -recommended molecules to experimentally actionable candidates. The 

initial PCL recommendation pool contained 30,800 molecules dist ributed across seven new prototypes. Sequential 

filtering based on molecular validity, molecular weight, synthetic accessibility, active hydrogen exclusion, CAS 

availability and practical cost considerations reduced the pool to 68 translation candidates. F urther prioritization 

according to commercial availability and experimental feasibility yielded four candidates for electrochemical 

validation, all assigned to NP3. Flow widths are proportional to the number of molecules retained from each 

prototype at eac h filtering stage. 

Table S 8 | 68  Candidates after  trans lation strategy 

Index  Compound 

ID  Formula  Molecular 

weight 

SA 

Score 

Prototype 

label  CAS number  Reported 

or not 

1 11090867  409.053  3.177  1 119618 -67 -6 No 

2 15877487  180.095  2.739  1 253280 -01 -2 No 

3 57041839  292.148  3.585  1 62043 -02 -1 No 

4 71390453  292.148  3.624  1 62043 -03 -2 No 

5 78020  278.136  3.984  1 4325 -85 -3 Yes 24 

6 425307  188.049  3.456  1 4887 -24 -5 No 

7 12418354  266.132  3.356  1 7560 -51 -2 No 

8 22338812  266.092  3.121  1 55923 -08 -5 No 

9 56973279  344.957  3.429  1 1356165 -73 -

5 No 

10  517955  69.940  3.831  1 1113 -22 -0 No 

11  138247  71.920  3.989  1 4443 -43 -0 No 

12  13301362  222.050  3.060  1 94839 -08 -4 No 

13  13789232  239.500  3.942  1 107134 -81 -6 No 

14  68979  55.920  3.834  1 593 -90 -8 No 

15  25068199  405.100  3.195  1 951163 -66 -9 No 

16  66709077  182.122  3.664  2 1392108 -88 -

1 No 

17  15158954  148.020  3.571  2 139298 -13 -8 No 

18  11522786  331.000  2.822  2 872044 -92 -3 No 

19  22663171  193.120  3.577  2 141938 -41 -2 No 25 

20  25112575  556.257  2.677  3 624744 -67 -8 No 

21  58050304  430.210  2.540  3 1149804 -35 -

2 No 

22  58489416  430.210  2.524  3 1115639 -92 -

3 No 

23  23115783  502.500  2.529  3 281668 -51 -7 No 

24  58769449  354.300  2.472  3 890042 -13 -4 No 

25  21425  818.862  2.456  5 5337 -41 -7 No 

26  125587  224.200  3.947  5 32327 -52 -9 No 

27  13680338  238.300  3.883  5 16413 -17 -5 No 

28  71384846  350.500  3.582  5 62594 -01 -8 No 

29  71384845  350.500  3.983  5 62594 -02 -9 No 

30  71334465  560.900  2.331  5 106787 -52 -4 No 

31  71386315  460.700  2.844  5 62444 -57 -9 No 

32  71352225  476.700  2.070  5 1188 -97 -2 No 

33  352104  518.799  2.065  5 14245 -38 -6 No 26 

34  71346374  211.180  3.403  5 151293 -65 -1 No 

35  17177  398.500  3.931  5 2467 -13 -2 No 

36  21424  314.300  3.996  5 5337 -37 -1 No 

37  17178  566.800  2.247  5 2467 -15 -4 No 

38  219443  440.600  3.010  5 3088 -77 -5 No 

39  108841  608.900  2.480  5 59802 -06 -1 No 

40  15605783  296.100  3.454  6 267006 -38 -2 No 

41  18373965  240.038  3.337  6 848609 -02 -9 No 

42  582056  511.985  2.800  6 1109 -15 -5 Yes 

43  11727684  344.993  2.819  6 165612 -94 -2 No 

44  75360847  458.017  3.449  6 2003 -04 -5 Yes 

45  10959856  380.380  3.032  6 2720 -03 -8 No 

46  11115716  359.960  2.958  6 170151 -48 -1 No 

47  12626668  248.770  3.405  6 830 -48 -8 No 27 

48  11050988  770.100  3.300  6 190282 -03 -2 Yes 

49  15520532  207.940  3.206  6 363596 -54 -7 No 

50  10876447  770.100  3.354  6 204930 -04 -1 Yes 

51  71428744  494.000  3.182  6 916442 -23 -4 Yes 

52  71420187  598.200  3.056  6 820972 -26 -7 No 

53  71447200  367.850  3.257  6 329009 -01 -0 No 

54  71350376  448.100  3.152  6 165612 -90 -8 No 

55  71428745  854.100  3.459  6 916336 -48 -6 Yes 

56  4121732  221.150  3.178  6 4426 -24 -8 No 

57  11327649  422.000  2.897  6 148892 -98 -2 No 

58  4072412  302.100  3.264  6 158752 -98 -8 No 

59  144241  262.990  3.962  6 67395 -53 -3 No 

60  22722373  332.100  2.614  6 154735 -10 -1 No 

61  12159360  837.900  3.357  6 223769 -13 -9 No 28 

62  3599767  307.910  3.422  6 659 -18 -7 Yes 

63  18329245  1100.100  3.875  6 213974 -85 -7 No 

64  2736203  511.900  3.443  6 6919 -80 -8 Yes 

65  54472851  607.950  3.432  6 755 -53 -3 Yes 

66  15887311  560.000  2.965  6 146355 -12 -6 Yes 

67  52915087  403.960  3.776  6 2317 -76 -2 Yes 

68  4438527  679.000  2.839  6 47855 -94 -7 Yes  

> Table S 9| 4 final molecules

Compound 

ID  Molecular name  CAS  Formula  Price  Action 

25112575 

2-[9,10 -Di(naphthalen -2-

yl)anthracen -2-yl] -4,4,5,5 -

tetramethyl -1,3,2 -

dioxaborolane 

624744 -67 -8 240.9 ￥/g Under 

preparation 

58050304 

4,4,5,5 -Tetramethyl -2-[10 -(1 -

naphthyl)anthracen -9-yl] -1,3,2 -

dioxaborolane 

1149804 -35 -2 557.9 ￥/g

Select to do 

the validation 

experiment 

58489416 

4,4,5,5 -Tetramethyl -2-[3 -

(triphenylen -2-yl)phenyl] -1,3,2 -

dioxaborolane 

1115639 -92 -3 122.9 ￥/g Under 

preparation 

58769449 

4,4,5,5 -Tetramethyl -2-

(triphenylen -2-yl) -1,3,2 -

dioxaborolane 

890042 -13 -4 68 .9 ￥/g Under 

preparation 29 

Fig ure  S1 1 | C 1s XPS analysis of graphite electrodes cycled with and without TNDB.  High -resolution C 1s 

spectra and peak deconvolution of graphite electrodes recovered from the baseline electrolyte after (a) formation 

and (b) 100 cycles, and from the TNDB -containing electrolyte after (c) formation and (d) 100 cycles at 55  ° C. The 

fitted components are assigned to C –C, C –O, C=O, lithium alkyl carbonates (ROCO 2Li) and Li 2CO 3. Open squares 

represent the experimental data, red curves the overall fits and colored curves the individual fitted components. 

Binding energies were calibrated to the C –C peak at 284.8  eV. 280 285 290 295 Intensity (a.u.) Binding energy (eV)  

> w/o TNDB Formation C-C C-O C=O ROCO 2Li Li 2CO 3

# b

## 280 285 290 295 Intensity (a.u.) Binding energy (eV) 

> 100 cycle w/o TNDB

## 280 285 290 295 Intensity (a.u.) Binding energy (eV) 

> with TNDB Formation

# ac

## 280 285 290 295 Intensity (a.u.) Binding energy (eV) 

> with TNDB 100 cycle

# d30 

Fig ure  S12 | Three -dimensional ToF -SIMS compositional renderings of representative SEI fragments on 

graphite electrodes cycled at 55 ° C with and without TNDB.  From left to right, the mapped negative secondary -

ion fragments are PO 2⁻, LiF 2⁻, CO 3⁻ and CH 3CO ⁻. The rows correspond, from top to bottom, to graphite electrodes 

recovered from the baseline electrolyte after formation and after 100 cycles, and from the TNDB -containing 

electrolyte after formation and after 100 cycles at 55  ° C. The renderings visualize the spatial and depth -dependent 

distributions of the selected fragments within the sputtered interphase volume. 31 

Fig ure  S13 | Depth -resolved distribution of additive -derived boron in the graphite SEI.  X–Z cross -sectional 

ToF -SIMS maps of the B ⁻ secondary -ion fragment obtained from graphite electrodes cycled in the TNDB -containing 

electrolyte after formation and after 100 cycles at 55  ° C. Color scales are independently adjusted for visualization. 

Fig ure  S14 | ToF -SIMS sputter -depth profiles of the graphite SEI formed with and without TNDB.  (a) CH 3CO ⁻,

representing oxygenated organic fragments derived from electrolyte decomposition; (b) LiF 2⁻, representing LiF -

related inorganic species; and (c) PO 2⁻, associated with LiPF 6-derived P -O species. (d) CO 3⁻, representing 

carbonate -containing residues.  The profiles are interpreted as relative depth -distribution trends. 0 200 400 600 800 1000 

> Intensity (a.u.)

Sputtering Time (s)      

> w/o TNDB Formation w/o TNDB 100 Cycle with TNDB Formation with TNDB 100 cycle CH 3CO-0200 400 600 800 1000
> Intensity (a.u.)

Sputtering Time (s) 

> w/o TNDB Formation w/o TNDB 100 Cycle with TNDB Formation with TNDB 100 cycle LiF 2-

a bc d     

> 0200 400 600 800 1000
> Intensity (a.u.)

Sputtering Time (s)      

> w/o TNDB Formation w/o TNDB 100 Cycle with TNDB Formation with TNDB 100 cycle PO 2-0200 400 600 800 1000 w/o TNDB Formation w/o TNDB 100 Cycle with TNDB Formation with TNDB 100 cycle
> Intensity (a.u.)

Sputtering Time (s) 

> CO 3-

32 

Fig ure  S15  | ToF -SIMS sputtering -time profiles of the FeO ⁻ secondary -ion fragment for graphite electrodes 

recovered after formation and 100 cycles. 

Fig ure  S16 | Surface morphology of graphite electrodes after cycling.  Representative SEM images of graphite 

electrodes recovered from LiFePO 4||graphite cells using the (a,b) baseline electrolyte and (c,d) TNDB -containing 

electrolyte after (a,c) formation and (b,d) 100 cycles at 55  ° C. TOF-SIMS, FeO -     

> 0200 400 600 800 1000
> Intensity (a.u.)

Sputtering time (s)   

> w/o TNDB, formation w/o TNDB, 100 th cycle w/ TNDB, formation w/ TNDB, 100 th cycle

33 

Fig ure  S17  | Details of the  large -language -model -assisted  data -mining pipeline . Content identification: identify 

the electrolyte and interphase -related information. Auto -extraction: using the large language model to extract specific 

content guided by the user prompts. Auto -correction: read the corresponding literature for each electro lyte and 

additive entity again to check the correction of the extracted information.  The deadline for collecting the dataset is 

before  July 2025.  And the prompts used in  the extraction stage are shown in the Supplementary Figure S18 and 

Figure S19. LLMs Electrolyte Info 

> {"electrolyte_type ": "Liquid",
> "battery_system ": "Li-ion battery",
> "format ": "Not found", "cathode_material ": "Not found", "anode_material ": "Graphite", "electrolyte ": "Methyl acetate (MA) with 0.1 M TPFPB + 0.3 M LiF, 10% FEC, and 0.05 M LiDFOB additive",
> "additive ": "Lithium
> Difluoro(oxalato)borate (LiDFOB) and Fluoroethylene carbonate (FEC)", "year ": "2025“
> },

Content 

Identification Auto-Extraction Auto-Correction 

Interphase Info {

> 'CEI ': 'Form a stable and dense
> CEI membrane.’,
> 'SEI ': 'Suppressing side reactions
> and reducing interface impedance.’
> }

Electrolyte 

Additive 

> Cell type Additives Molecule SMILES
> Electrolytes

Heuristic extraction of literature knowledge 

Info accuracy 

> 70.7% 82.6% 94.4%

Extracted data  

> …… …% 34

Figure S 18 | Prompt for content identification  and auto -extraction .35 

Figure S 19 | Prompt for auto -correction. 36    

> Table S 10 |Edge features and corresponding physical meanings

Feature  index  Physical Meaning  Feature type  Encoding type  Data type 

1 bond_type_single  Edge  feature  One hot encoding  String 

2 bond_type_double  Edge feature  One hot encoding  String 

3 bond_type_triple  Edge feature  One hot encoding  String 

4 bond_type_aromatic  Edge feature  One hot encoding  String 

5 bond_is_conjugated  Edge feature  Numerical  Int 

6 bond_is_in_ring  Edge feature  Numerical  Int 

7 bond_dir_none  Edge feature  One hot encoding  String 

8 bond_dir_beginwedge  Edge feature  One hot encoding  String 

9 bond_dir_begindash  Edge feature  One hot encoding  String 

10  bond_dir_enddownright  Edge feature  One hot encoding  String 

11  bond_dir_endupright  Edge feature  One hot encoding  String 

12  bond_is_aromatic  Edge feature  Numerical  Int 

13  stereo_type_stereoz  Edge feature  One hot encoding  String 

14  stereo_type_stereoe  Edge feature  One hot encoding  String 

15  stereo_type_stereoany  Edge feature  One hot encoding  String 

16  stereo_type_stereonone  Edge feature  One hot encoding  String 37 

Reference s

1 Murtagh, F. & Contreras, P. Algorithms for hierarchical clustering: an overview.  Wiley 

interdisciplinary reviews: data mining and knowledge discovery  2, 86 -97 (2012). 

2 Bajusz, D., Rácz, A. & Héberger, K. Why is Tanimoto index an appropriate choice for 

fingerprint -based similarity calculations?  Journal of Cheminformatics  7, 20 (2015). 

3 Likas, A., Vlassis, N. & Verbeek, J. J. The global k -means clustering algorithm.  Pattern 

recognition  36 , 451 -461 (2003). 

4 McInnes, L., Healy, J. & Melville, J. Umap: Uniform manifold approximation and 

projection for dimension reduction.  arXiv preprint arXiv:1802.03426  (2018). 

5 Ertl, P. & Schuffenhauer, A. Estimation of synthetic accessibility score of drug -like 

molecules based on molecular complexity and fragment contributions.  Journal of 

Cheminformatics  1 (2009). 

6 Zou, Y.  et al.  Enhanced interfacial stability of a LiNi0. 9Co0. 05Mn0. 05O2 cathode by 

a diboron additive.  ACS Applied Energy Materials  4, 11051 -11061 (2021). 

7 Zhang, W.  et al.  Dynamically constructing robust cathode -electrolyte -interphase on 

nickel -rich cathode by organic boron additive for high -performance lithium -ion batteries. 

Chemical Engineering Journal  491 , 151946 (2024). 

8 Chen, Y.  et al.  Molecular -level designed single electrolyte additive with multifunctional 

groups enabling high mechanical properties/fast Li+ kinetics interphase for wide -

temperature nickel -rich/graphite batteries.  Chemical Engineering Journal  500 , 157218 

(2024). 

9 Sun, Z.  et al.  High -voltage and high -temperature LiCoO2 operation via the electrolyte 

additive of electron -defect boron compounds.  ACS Energy Letters  8, 2478 -2487 (2023). 

10  Zhou, H.  et al.  Controlled Anodic Decomposition Pathway of Supramolecular Lithium 

Borate for Rationally Tuned Interphase Chemistry.  Angewandte Chemie  137 ,

e202500425 (2025). 

11  Wang, Y.  et al.  N-heterocyclic carbene as a potent LiNO3 -solubilizer, Li+ -solvation 

regulator and solid -electrolyte interphase enhancer for highly durable Lithium metal 

batteries.  Chemical Engineering Journal , 166397 (2025). 

12  Peng, S. -H., Kuan, W. -F. & Lue, S. J. Electro -boost in -situ formation of poly 

(tetrahydrofuran) to enhance interfacial compatibility and charge transfer for solid 

polymer electrolyte.  European Polymer Journal  234 , 114016 (2025). 

13  Kucuk, A. C. & Abe, T. Borolan -2-yl involving anion acceptors for organic liquid 

electrolyte -based fluoride shuttle batteries.  Journal of Fluorine Chemistry  240 , 109672 

(2020). 

14  Zhang, S. & Angell, C. A Novel Electrolyte Solvent for Rechargeable Lithium and 

Lithium ‐Ion Batteries.  Journal of The Electrochemical Society  143 , 4047 -4053 (1996). 

15  Lv, J., Wang, Z., Zhou, Y., Yu, W. & Jia, Q. Application of a cost -effective boron -based 

electrolyte additive in high -voltage lithium metal battery.  Journal of Energy Storage  112 ,

115596 (2025). 

16  Li, L., Lee, H., Li, H., Yang, X. & Huang, X. A pentafluorophenylboron oxalate additive 

in non -aqueous electrolytes for lithium batteries.  Electrochemistry communications  11 ,

2296 -2299 (2009). 

17  Sasaki, Y., Handa, M., Kurashima, K., Tonuma, T. & Usami, K. Application of lithium 38 

organoborate with salicylic ligand to lithium battery electrolyte.  Journal of The 

Electrochemical Society  148 , A999 -A1003 (2001). 

18  Sun, X., Lee, H., Yang, X. & McBreen, J. Comparative studies of the electrochemical 

and thermal stability of two types of composite lithium battery electrolytes using boron ‐

based anion receptors.  Journal of The Electrochemical Society  146 , 3655 -3659 (1999). 

19  Kaymaksiz, S.  et al.  Electrochemical stability of lithium salicylato -borates as electrolyte 

additives in Li -ion batteries.  Journal of Power Sources  239 , 659 -669 (2013). 

20  Chen, Z. & Amine, K. Bifunctional electrolyte additive for lithium -ion batteries. 

Electrochemistry communications  9, 703 -707 (2007). 

21  McBreen, J., Lee, H., Yang, X. & Sun, X. New approaches to the design of polymer and 

liquid electrolytes for lithium batteries.  Journal of Power Sources  89 , 163 -167 (2000). 

22  Parida, R. & Lee, J. Y. Boron based podand molecule as an anion receptor additive in 

Li -ion battery electrolytes: A combined density functional theory and molecular 

dynamics study.  Journal of Molecular Liquids  384 , 122236 (2023). 

23  Li, X. -Y., Xue, Z. -M., Zhao, J. -F. & Chen, C. -H. A new lithium salt with tetrafluoro -1, 2 -

benzenediolato and oxalato complexes of boron for lithium battery electrolytes.  Journal 

of Power Sources  235 , 274 -279 (2013). 

24  Zhu, Y.  et al.  A composite gel polymer electrolyte with high performance based on poly 

(vinylidene fluoride) and polyborate for lithium ion batteries.  Advanced Energy 

Materials  4, 1300647 (2014). 

25  Chen, Y. -Q.  et al.  An electrolyte additive with boron -nitrogen -oxygen alkyl group 

enabled stable cycling for high voltage LiNi0. 5Mn1. 5O4 cathode in lithium -ion battery. 

Journal of Power Sources  477 , 228473 (2020). 

26  Aravindan, V., Gnanaraj, J., Madhavi, S. & Liu, H. K. Lithium ‐ion conducting electrolyte 

salts for lithium batteries.  Chemistry –A European Journal  17 , 14326 -14346 (2011). 

27  Zhu, Y., Xiao, S., Shi, Y., Yang, Y. & Wu, Y. A trilayer poly (vinylidene 

fluoride)/polyborate/poly (vinylidene fluoride) gel polymer electrolyte with good 

performance for lithium ion batteries.  Journal of Materials Chemistry A  1, 7790 -7797 

(2013). 

28  Tang, Y. -N., Xue, Z. -M., Ding, J. & Chen, C. -H. Two unsymmetrical lithium 

organoborates with mixed -ligand of croconato and oxalicdiolato or benzenediolato for 

lithium battery electrolytes.  Journal of Power Sources  218 , 134 -139 (2012). 

29  Liu, Y.  et al.  Impacts of lithium tetrafluoroborate and lithium difluoro (oxalate) borate as 

additives on the storage life of Li -ion battery at elevated temperature.  Ionics  24 , 1617 -

1628 (2018). 

30  Feng, Y. H.  et al.  Dual ‐Anionic Coordination Manipulation Induces Phosphorus and 

Boron ‐Rich Gradient Interphase Towards Stable and Safe Sodium Metal Batteries. 

Angewandte Chemie  137 , e202415644 (2025). 

31  Xu, W., Shusterman, A. J., Marzke, R. & Angell, C. A. LiMOB, an unsymmetrical 

nonaromatic orthoborate salt for nonaqueous solution electrochemical applications. 

Journal of The Electrochemical Society  151 , A632 -A638 (2004). 

32  Liu, P.  et al.  Interphase building of organic –inorganic hybrid polymer solid electrolyte 

with uniform intermolecular Li+ path for stable lithium metal batteries.  Small  17 ,

2102454 (2021). 39 

33  Chen, Z., Liu, J. & Amine, K. Lithium difluoro (oxalato) borate as salt for lithium -ion 

batteries.  Electrochemical and solid -state letters  10 , A45 -A47 (2007). 

34  Lee, H., Ma, Z., Yang, X., Sun, X. & McBreen, J. Synthesis of a series of fluorinated 

boronate compounds and their use as additives in lithium battery electrolytes.  Journal 

of The Electrochemical Society  151 , A1429 -A1435 (2004). 

35  Sasaki, Y., Sekiya, S., Handa, M. & Usami, K. Chelate complexes with boron as lithium 

salts for lithium battery electrolytes.  Journal of Power Sources  79 , 91 -96 (1999). 

36  Kucuk, A. C., Yamanaka, T. & Abe, T. Fluoride shuttle batteries: on the performance of 

the BiF3 electrode in organic liquid electrolytes containing a mixture of lithium bis 

(oxalato) borate and triphenylboroxin.  Solid State Ionics  357 , 115499 (2020). 

37  Xue, Z. -M., Zhao, J. -F., Ding, J. & Chen, C. -H. LBDOB, a new lithium salt with 

benzenediolato and oxalato complexes of boron for lithium battery electrolytes.  Journal 

of Power Sources  195 , 853 -856 (2010). 

38  Kwon, H.  et al.  Covariance of interphasic properties and fast chargeability of energy -

dense lithium metal batteries.  Nature Energy  10 , 1132 -1145 (2025). 

39  Shah, F. U., Gnezdilov, O. I. & Filippov, A. Ion dynamics in halogen -free phosphonium 

bis (salicylato) borate ionic liquid electrolytes for lithium -ion batteries.  Physical 

Chemistry Chemical Physics  19 , 16721 -16730 (2017). 

40  Long, J.  et al.  Efficient boron -based electrolytes constructed by anionic and interfacial 

co -regulation for rechargeable magnesium batteries.  Chemical Engineering Journal 

461 , 141901 (2023). 

41  Nie, M., Xia, J. & Dahn, J. Development of pyridine -boron trifluoride electrolyte 

additives for lithium -ion batteries.  Journal of The Electrochemical Society  162 , A1186 -

A1195 (2015). 

42  Park, N. R.  et al.  Understanding the role of lithium borate as the surface coating on 

high voltage single crystal LiNi0. 5Mn1. 5O4.  Advanced Functional Materials  34 ,

2312091 (2024). 

43  Xie, Z.  et al.  Designing High -Temperature Stable Electrolytes: Insights from the 

Degradation Mechanisms of Boron -Containing Additives.  Journal of the American 

Chemical Society  147 , 23931 -23945 (2025). 

44  Ma, L.  et al.  A systematic study of some promising electrolyte additives in Li 

[Ni1/3Mn1/3Co1/3] O2/graphite, Li [Ni0. 5Mn0. 3Co0. 2]/graphite and Li [Ni0. 6Mn0. 

2Co0. 2]/graphite pouch cells.  Journal of Power Sources  299 , 130 -138 (2015). 

45  Öksüzoğlu, F.  et al.  The Impact of boron compounds on the structure and ionic 

conductivity of LATP solid electrolytes.  Materials  17 , 3846 (2024). 

46  Liu, S.  et al.  Dendrite -free lithium deposition enabled by interfacial regulation via dipole -

dipole interaction in anode -free lithium metal batteries.  Energy Storage Materials  62 ,

102959 (2023). 

47  Wang, D.  et al.  Enhanced ionic conductivity of Li3. 5Si0. 5P0. 5O4 with addition of 

lithium borate.  Solid State Ionics  283 , 109 -114 (2015). 

48  Pershina, S., Vovkotrub, E. & Antonov, B. Effects of B2O3 on crystallization kinetics, 

microstructure and properties of Li1. 5Al0. 5Ge1. 5 (PO4) 3 -based glass -ceramics. 

Solid State Ionics  383 , 115990 (2022). 

49  Aslam, M. & Kong, X. Y. A lithium ion conductor in Li4SiO4 -Li3PO4 -LiBO2 ternary 40 

system.  Solid State Ionics  293 , 72 -76 (2016). 

50  Li, J.  et al.  Understanding interfacial properties between Li -rich layered oxide and 

electrolyte containing triethyl borate.  The Journal of Physical Chemistry C  120 , 26899 -

26907 (2016). 

51  Cai, Q.  et al.  Synergistic effects of film -forming and film -modifying additives for 

enhanced all -climate performance of graphite/NMC622 pouch cells.  Chemical 

Engineering Journal  505 , 159156 (2025). 

52  Liu, Z., Patra, A. & Matsumi, N. Boron -Containing Ternary Electrolyte for Excellent Li -

Ion Transference and Stabilization of LiNMC -Based Cells.  ACS Applied Energy 

Materials  8, 3360 -3368 (2025). 

53  Zhang, Y.  et al.  BF3 -based electrolyte additives promote electrochemical reactions to 

boost the energy density of Li/CFx primary batteries.  Electrochimica Acta  470 , 143311 

(2023). 

54  Yan, J.  et al.  Sustainable release of borate -and nitrate -electrolyte additives via metal -

organic frameworks nanocapsules for stable lithium metal batteries.  Chemical 

Engineering Journal  494 , 153104 (2024). 

55  Cai, K.  et al.  Tow -way regulation strategy for in -situ electropolymerization additives 

coordinated by double bonds and boric acid groups in lithium secondary batteries. 

Chemical Engineering Journal  500 , 156790 (2024). 

56  Duan, P. H.  et al.  Dynamic anion enables self ‐healing single ‐ion conductor polymer 

electrolyte for lithium ‐metal batteries.  Advanced Functional Materials  34 , 2402065 

(2024). 

57  Kumagae, K.  et al.  Improvement of cycling performance of FeF3 -based lithium -ion 

battery by boron -based additives.  Journal of The Electrochemical Society  163 , A1633 -

A1636 (2016). 

58  Song, X.  et al.  Iodine Boosted Fluoro ‐Organic Borate Electrolytes Enabling Fluent Ion ‐

Conductive Solid Electrolyte Interphase for High ‐Performance Magnesium Metal 

Batteries.  Angewandte Chemie  137 , e202417450 (2025). 

59  Lohani, H.  et al.  Fluorine Rich Borate Salt Anion Based Electrolyte for High Voltage 

Sodium Metal Battery Development.  Small  20 , 2311157 (2024). 

60  Ma, Y.  et al.  A new anion receptor for improving the interface between lithium -and 

manganese -rich layered oxide cathode and the electrolyte.  Chemistry of Materials  29 ,

2141 -2149 (2017). 

61  Hou, Z., Zhou, R., Liu, K., Zhu, J. & Zhang, B. A CaI2 ‐Based Electrolyte Enabled by 

Borate Ester Anion Receptors for Reversible Ca− Organic and Ca− Se Batteries. 

Angewandte Chemie International Edition  64 , e202413416 (2025). 

62  Nagasubramanian, G. & Sanchez, B. A new chemical approach to improving discharge 

capacity of Li/(CFx) n cells.  Journal of Power Sources  165 , 630 -634 (2007). 

63  Li, L.  et al.  New electrolytes for lithium ion batteries using LiF salt and boron based 

anion receptors.  Journal of Power Sources  184 , 517 -521 (2008). 

64  Li, T.  et al.  In situ polymerization of 1, 3 -dioxolane and formation of fluorine/boron -rich 

interfaces enabled by film -forming additives for long -life lithium metal batteries. 

Chemical Science  15 , 12108 -12117 (2024). 

65  Meng, Y., Chen, G., Shi, L., Liu, H. & Zhang, D. Operando fourier transform infrared 41 

investigation of cathode electrolyte interphase dynamic reversible evolution on Li1. 

2Ni0. 2Mn0. 6O2.  ACS Applied Materials & Interfaces  11 , 45108 -45117 (2019). 

66  Zhang, Z.  et al.  Enhancing the electrochemical performance of a high -voltage LiCoO2 

cathode with a bifunctional electrolyte additive.  ACS Applied Energy Materials  4,

12954 -12964 (2021). 

67  Horino, T.  et al.  High voltage stability of interfacial reaction at the LiMn2O4 thin -film 

electrodes/liquid electrolytes with boroxine compounds.  Journal of The Electrochemical 

Society  157 , A677 -A681 (2010). 

68  Shim, J., Lee, J. S., Lee, J. H., Kim, H. J. & Lee, J. -C. Gel polymer electrolytes 

containing anion -trapping boron moieties for lithium -ion battery applications.  ACS 

Applied Materials & Interfaces  8, 27740 -27752 (2016). 

69  Yang, Z., Ye, Y., Meng, N. & Lian, F. Adaptive 3D Cross ‐Linked Single ‐Ion Conducting 

Polymer Electrolytes Enable Powerful Interface for Solid State Batteries.  Angewandte 

Chemie  137 , e202505232 (2025). 

70  Forero -Saboya, J., Bodin, C. & Ponrouch, A. A boron -based electrolyte additive for 

calcium electrodeposition.  Electrochemistry communications  124 , 106936 (2021). 

71  Hong, D. G., Baik, J. -H., Kim, S. & Lee, J. -C. Solid polymer electrolytes based on 

polysiloxane with anion -trapping boron moieties for all -solid -state lithium metal 

batteries.  Polymer  240 , 124517 (2022). 

72  Yang, X.  et al.  Stabilizing lithium manganese oxide/organic carbonate electrolyte 

interface with a simple boron -containing additive.  Electrochimica Acta  227 , 24 -32 

(2017). 

73  Shin, H.  et al.  Synthesis and characteristics of acrylol borate as new acrylic gelator for 

lithium secondary battery.  Macromolecular Research  16 , 134 -138 (2008). 

74  Freiberg, A.  et al.  Anodic decomposition of trimethylboroxine as additive for high 

voltage Li -ion batteries.  Journal of The Electrochemical Society  161 , A2255 -A2261 

(2014). 

75  Luo, S.  et al.  Construction of stable two -sided interface via the addition of phenylboric 

acid in Lithium -ion batteries.  Electrochimica Acta  498 , 144684 (2024). 

76  Xi, K.  et al.  A novel strategy to improve the electrochemical properties of in -situ 

polymerized 1, 3 -dioxolane electrolyte in lithium metal batteries.  Journal of Colloid and 

Interface Science  679 , 1277 -1287 (2025). 

77  Zhang, C.  et al.  Small Molecule Accurate Recognition Technology (SMART) to 

Enhance Natural Products Research.  Scientific Reports  7 (2017).