Title: 2607.06743v1.pdf

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2607.06743v1

Published Time: Thu, 09 Jul 2026 00:07:44 GMT

Number of Pages: 51

Markdown Content:
VIBES -A Two -Stage Scalable Bayesian Uncertainty Quantification 

# Framework : Appli cation to a Biomass Valorization Process 

Poulomi Das 1, Angan Mukherjee 2, and Debangsu Bhattacharyya 1*

> 1

Department of Chemical and Biomedical Engineering, West Virginia University, Morgantown, WV 26506, USA 

> 2

Department of Chemical and Biological Engineering, University of Wisconsin -Madison, Madison, WI 53706, USA 

Abstract 

This paper proposes Variational Inference -based Bayesian Estimation with Sobol screening (VIBES) – a two -

stage scalable framework for Bayesian uncertainty quantification (UQ) . The proposed approach combin es 

Sobol global sensitivity analysis (GSA) for screening and dimensionality reduction , followed by variational 

inference (VI) for UQ of kinetic, design /operational , and economic parameters. In the first stage, Sobol GSA 

is performed to identify dominant variables and parameters governing uncertainty in process outputs. In the 

second stage, Bayesian inference is perform ed only on the reduced dimensional space using VI, thus 

reducing computational burden and enhancing scalability. The framework is demonstrated on a process for 

bioadhesive production through base -catalyzed depolymerization of kraft lignin and subsequent 

crosslinking with isolated soy protein. A Python -Aspen interface is develop ed for automated simulation and 

parameter estimation, enabling Bayesian calibration through stochastic gradient -based optimization and 

automatic -differentiation. The methodology is generic and readily generalizable to other biomass conversion 

pathways. The results show that application of VIBES consistently reduces predictive uncertainty bounds 

across all model outputs by more than 8 0%, even when only the reduced -space input variables and 

parameters are optimized during Bayesian estimation . The framework can be potentially applied for 

scalable, uncertainty -aware decision -making in high -dimensional, complex chemical process systems. 

Keywords : Bayesian uncertainty quantification, biomass valorization, Sobol sensitivity, variational 

inference, sustainability 

______________________________________________________________________________ 

*Corresponding author. Tel: +1 -3042939335, Fax: +1 -3042934139 

E-mail address:  Debangsu.Bhattacharyya@mail.wvu.edu 1. Introduction 

High -dimensional process models of chemical process systems can be used for process design, 

techno -economic analysis, sustainability analysis , and many other objectives . Such models are 

developed using mass , energy, and momentum conservation equations that might require sub -

models for reaction kinetics, thermodynamics, physical property, heat and mass transport , capital 

and operating cost estimates, etc. However, there are often uncertainties in the parameters and 

form of these sub -model s that can lead to uncertaint ies in outputs from these model s. Key outputs 

of interest often include both performance measures such as conversion, product yield, selectivity, 

utility consumption, emissions, etc. , and economic metrics like net present value, minimum selling 

price, levelized cost of production , etc . (Monteiro and Bhattacharyya, 2026; Morgan et al., 2015) .

Therefore, uncertainty quantification (UQ) is desired beyond nominal deterministic simulations 

(Kennedy and O’Hagan, 2001; Morgan et al., 2015) , especially when process models are used for 

design, analysis, and decision -making .

UQ is particularly challenging when multiple sources of uncertainty interact across scales and 

process subsystems. For example, parameter uncertainty can arise from limited kinetic, 

thermodynamic , and mass /heat transfer data availability , whereas model -form uncertainty can 

result from simplified mechanisms, empirical correlations, incomplete physical descriptions, or 

assumptions introduced during model development (Mukherjee et al., 2025b; Ostace et al., 2020) .

In addition, uncertainty in operating conditions, feed composition, experimental measurements, 

and boundary conditions can affect both model calibration and process -level predictions (Morgan 

et al., 2015; Ostace et al., 2020) . It has been observed that uncertainty in property models, mass 

transfer correlations, reaction kinetics, and other constitutive sub -models can lead to appreciable 

uncertainty in process performance, design requirements, and scale -up decisions (Hughes et al., 

2022; Morgan et al., 2018; Soares Chinen et al., 2018) . UQ has been undertaken for various 

chemical engineering applications, including  𝐶 𝑂 2 adsorption process models (Kalyanaraman et 

al., 2016) , hydraulic and mass transfer sub -models (Soares Chinen et al., 2018) and physical 

properties and thermodynamic models (Morgan et al., 2015; Ostace et al., 2020) for solvent -based 

carbon capture processes , crude distillation unit (Minh et al., 2018) , and fluidized -based 

gasification systems (Pan and Pandey, 2016) .Despite these advances, the computational scalability of UQ remains a major challenge for 

nonlinear and high -dimensional process models (Ostace et al., 2020) . Most UQ analyses involve 

uncertainty propagation through process model s, life -cycle models , or supply -chain models with 

sampling approaches such as several variants of Monte Carlo type methods , Latin hypercube 

sampling, and other approaches (Ou et al., 2018; Shi and Guest, 2020; Vicari et al., 2012) .

Computational expense for these approaches increases rapidly when the uncertain input space 

includes a large number of kinetic, design/operating, and economic variables and parameters, 

particularly when propagation of each sample requires the solution of a rigorous process model. 

This challenge is further exacerbated when uncertainty needs to be propagated through complex, 

highly nonlinear, and large process models with comprehensive mass/ heat integration, and 

economic calculations. Consequently, state -of -the -art UQ studies are often restrict ed to a lower 

dimensional input space often down -selected using local sensitivity measures, or use simplified 

surrogate representations, potentially overlooking nonlinear effects and interactions among 

uncertain quantities (Hughes et al., 2022; Kirchner et al., 2021; Strunge et al., 2023; Zhang, 2021) .

Bayesian approach es to UQ are being increasingly investigated for a variety of applications. 

Bayesian approaches combine prior knowledge with available observations (measurements) to 

estimate posterior distributions of uncertain variables and /or parameters (Kennedy and O’Hagan, 

2001) . Additionally, these approaches can quantif y the relevant ranges of model input variables 

and parameter s that remain consistent with available process, experimental, or market -derived 

information. However, sampling -based Bayesian approaches, such as Markov chain Monte Carlo 

(MCMC), can become computationally expensive for high -dimensional nonlinear process models 

that require repeated first -principles model evaluations (Bardsley and Hansen, 2020; Zhang, 2021) .

For keeping computational expenses tractable, down -selection of the input space is often 

undertaken through local sensitivity analysis mostly around nominal operating condition s, but it 

may not adequately represent nonlinea rities , higher -order interactions, or the global uncertainty 

structure spanning the combined input -output space (Strunge et al., 2023; Saltelli et al., 2010, 

2019) . These limitations motivate the development of scalable computational approaches for the 

unified and efficient end -to -end integration of global sensitivity analysis , reduced -dimensional 

Bayesian estimation, and posterior predictive UQ. The need for such approaches is especially pronounced when UQ is considered from a techno -

economic analysis (TEA) perspective. Specifically , the simultaneous dependence of TEA outputs on 

uncertain kinetic, design/operating, and economic variables and parameters (Das and 

Bhattacharyya, 2026a) leads to a high -dimensional and highly nonlinear inference problem. 

Uncertainty analysis of economic performance measures has also been reported. For example, 

propagation of uncertainty in feedstock properties, yields, capital costs, and market variables 

through Aspen -based TEA models (Vicari et al., 2012) or biorefinery simulation platforms such as 

BioSTEAM (Cortes -Peña et al., 2020; Shi and Guest, 2020) has been undertaken to generate 

distributions of product cost, minimum selling price, etc . While such approaches are useful for 

quantifying how assumed input uncertainty affects model predictions, they do not infer posterior 

distributions of uncertain variables and parameters from available experimental or market data 

(Bardsley and Hansen, 2020; Salam et al., 2024) . In techno -economic studies, uncertainties in 

feedstock and product prices, utility tariffs, capital -cost factors, and policy variables are commonly 

examined through one -at -a-time sensitivity or scenario analysis, rather than through data -

conditioned posterior estimation (Strunge et al., 2023; Van Der Spek et al., 2020) . Even recent 

Bayesian optimization -based process economic studies use probabilistic surrogate models to 

identify favorable operating or design conditions and subsequently assess the effects of economic 

variables, but they do not seek joint posterior distributions of economic an d process variables and 

parameters from process and market target data (Park et al., 2026; Urm et al., 2023) . Consequently, 

there remains a need for developing an integrated framework that can sequentially identify 

dominant sources of uncertainty in process modeling and TEA workflows, followed by posterior 

estimation and Bayesian UQ in a computationally tractabl e reduced space. 

To address these challenges, this paper proposes Variational Inference -based Bayesian Estimation 

with Sobol screening (VIBES), a two -stage scalable Bayesian framework for UQ. In the first stage, 

Sobol global sensitivity analysis (GSA) is undertaken to screen the full uncertain input space and 

identify dominant kinetic, design/operating, and economic variables as well as parameters that 

govern variability in process and economic outputs (Saltelli et al., 2010) . This variance -based 

screening provides a rigorous dimensionality -reduction strategy that can still capture dominant 

nonlinear effects and parameter/variable interactions, while improving identifiability and computational tractability for the subsequent inference step. In the second stage, variational 

inference (VI) is performed over the reduced Sobol -selected input space to estimate posterior 

distributions of the influential uncertain variables and parameters (Mukherjee and Zavala, 2026; 

Wang et al., 2024) . By reformulating posterior inference as an optimization problem through 

approximation of the true posterior distribution (Mukherjee and Zavala, 2026; Thompson et al., 

2026; Wang et al., 2023) , VI provides a scalable alternative to conventional Bayesian sampling 

methods, especially for computationally expensive models where repeated model evaluations are 

expensive and rapid uncertainty updates are essential for design -space exploration. Estimated 

posterior distributions are then propagated through the process model to quantify posterior 

predictive uncertainty in both process and economic outputs. 

The proposed framework is generic and can be extended to high -dimensional chemical process 

systems, in general. In this work, VIBES is applie d to a biomass valorization process. In recent years, 

lignocellulosic biomass valorization has emerged as an important route for the production of fuels, 

chemicals, and value -added materials with improved sustainability by reducing dependence on 

fossil -derived resources (Das and Bhattacharyya, 2026a ;(Das and Bhattacharyya, 2026a; Kirchner 

et al., 2021) . However, the commercial deployment of novel biomass conversion technologies 

remains significantly challenging due to several interacting sources of uncertainty that can have 

strong impact on process performance, product quality, production rate, and economic viability. 

These uncertainties may arise from feedstock composition, limited experimental data, uncertain 

reaction pathways and kinetic parameters, scale -up assumptions, and market -dependent techno -

economic factors such as raw material prices, utility costs, and equipment cost correlations , to 

name a few (Das and Bhattacharyya, 2026b; Ou et al., 2018; Strunge et al., 2023) . As a result, UQ 

of novel biomass conversion technologies is highly desired to support uncertainty -aware process 

design and decision -making for different biomass valorization pathways. 

In this work, t he VIBES framework is demonstrated using a bioadhesive production process 

involving base -catalyzed depolymerization (BCD) of kraft lignin followed by crosslinking with soy 

protein isolate (SPI) (Das and Bhattacharyya, 2026b; Jiang et al., 2023) . The kraft lignin -soy protein 

isolate (KL -SPI) bio adhesive production technology is very novel and suffers from high uncertainties . In this work, available literature and market information are used to define physically 

meaningful ranges for selected kinetic, design/operating, and economic variables and parameters. 

These ranges provide representative information to generat e synthetic data in the absence of 

sufficient experimental, pilot -plant, and/ or market -derived observations for this particular or 

similar bio -adhesive manufacturing technologies . Obviously, any synthetic data that is used in this 

work can readily be replaced by measured or experimental data when such information become s

available. It is desired to investigate if the variability observed in target outputs, such as D -lignin 

(i.e., partially degraded lignin/oligomers (Das and Bhattacharyya, 2026b) ) flow rate as a process 

performance measure and levelized cost of adhesive (LCOA) as an economic performance 

indicator , can be explained and quantified in terms of kinetic, design/operating, and economic 

uncertaint ies in the underlying input space. VIBES uses available process and economic target 

information to infer posterior distributions of influential variables and parameters. The resulting 

posterior distributions are then propagated through the process model to enable uncertainty -aware 

design -sp ace exploration, recommendation of future experimental needs , and more reliable 

evaluation of KL -SPI bioadhesive manufacturing process. 

Selecting appropriate software platform(s) is often an important decision for Bayesian UQ. While 

process model s are often developed in a software that readily offers physical properties models 

and parameters and comprehensive library of process models of desired level of rigor for typical 

unit operations involved in chemical processes, tools/capabilities for UQ (Thompson et al., 2026) ,

optimization (Mukherjee et al., 2025a; Tian et al., 2023) , machine learning (ML) (Lin, 2024) , and data 

analytics (Oladokun et al., 2022) may be more readily available or more efficiently implemented in 

another computational ecosystem (Nikkhah et al., 2024) . When multiple software platforms are 

involved, it is important to consider compatibilities of these software, what information is needed 

vs what information is available to be communicated from one software to the other, and 

communication overhead. In this work , the process model for the bioadhesive production process 

is developed in Aspen Plus while other capabilities/tools for Bayesian UQ are developed in Python. 

Therefore, a multi -software integration approach is developed that enables automated input 

sampling, process simulation, output extraction, GSA, Bayesian inference, model evaluation, and 

posterior uncertainty propagation. This multi -software interface within VIBES further enables Bayesian calibration through stochastic gradient -based optimization (Tian et al., 2023) and 

automatic differentiation using JAX (Lin, 2024) during iterative inference, while the high -fidelity 

process model is used to evaluate posterior predictive uncertainty. In addition, this work 

systematically compares and contrasts different dimension alities of the Sobol -selected input 

space that achieves significant reduction in predictive uncertainty, rather than selecting a fixed 

reduced dimension a priori , thereby enhancing computational scalability during posterior 

estimation. 

In summary, the main contributions of this paper are as follows: 

• Development of VIBES, a two -stage scalable Bayesian framework that integrates Sobol GSA 

with VI for simultaneous estimation and UQ of dominant kinetic, design/operating, and 

economic variables and parameters in biomass valorization systems. 

• Implementation of a sensitivity -driven dimensionality -reduction strategy that identifies the 

most influential variables and parameters governing uncertainty in process and economic 

outputs, thus improving inferential tractability, reducing over -parameterization, and 

enhancing scalability during posterior estimation. 

• Development of a scalable posterior estimation and predictive UQ workflow, where VI is 

used to estimate posterior distributions of the Sobol -selected variables and parameters, 

followed by propagation of the se distributions through the process model to quantify 

posterior predictive uncertainty in process performance and economic indicators .

• Development of a multi -software computational platform for automated simulation, 

parameter estimation, model evaluation, and uncertainty propagation, enabling Bayesian 

calibration through stochastic gradient -based optimization and automatic differentiation 

(AD) during iterative inference. 

• Demonstration of the VIBES framework on a KL -SPI bio adhesive production process, where 

uncertaint ies in D -lignin mass flow rate and LCOA are quantified due to uncertainties in 

interacting kinetic, design/operating, and economic variables and parameters, th us resulting 

in uncertainty -aware design -space exploration and reliable decision -making for biomass 

valorization technologies. The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 presents the detailed computational 

workflow of VIBES, including the formulation of the reduced dimensional input space with Sobol -

screened variables and parameters, evaluation of posterior and predictive uncertainty using VI for 

Bayesian inference , followed by the development of a multi -software integration framework for 

automated simulation and analysis . Section 3 describes the KL -SPI bioadhesive production 

process , along with the relevant implementation details of th e multi -software interface and the list 

of uncertain input variables and parameters considered in this work . Section 4 presents and 

discusses the results obtained from the implementation of VIBES for simultaneous parameter 

estimation and UQ in the selected case study . Finally, Section 5 summarizes the major findings in 

the concluding remarks and presents potential directions for future work. 

## 2. VIBES: Computational Workflow 

This section presents the overall computational framework of VIBES. The proposed workflow leads 

to the formulation of a two -stage Bayesian approach that integrates Sobol GSA with VI for scalable 

parameter estimation and UQ. The separation of sensitivity -driven dimensionality reduction and 

Bayesian estimation enhances the scalability of VIBES . The framework can be implemented entirely 

within a single computational ecosystem or through a multi -software integration platform, as 

discussed in Section 2.3. 

2.1. Sobol Global Sensitivity Analysis 

The first stage of VIBES employs Sobol GSA to identify the subset of dominating uncertain variables 

and parameters for the process and economic outputs. The objective of this screening step is to 

reduce the dimensionality of the Bayesian estimation (optimization) problem before applying VI . It 

is worth mentioning here that VIBES solve s an inverse problem for estimating uncertainty in the 

uncertain variables and parameters given available experimental or market -derived data. 

Simultaneously estimating all uncertain input variables and parameters would not only lead to high 

computational expense, but also can lead to poor estimability especially when availability of 

experimental or market -derived data is scarce as would be expected for novel biomass valorization 

technologies. This further motivates the sensitivity -guided dimensionality reduction before 

Bayesian inference .Let the process model be represented as  𝒚 = 𝑓 (𝜽 ), where  𝜽 = [𝜃 1, 𝜃 2 , … , 𝜃 𝐷 ]𝑇 ∈ ℝ𝐷  denotes the 

vector of  𝐷  uncertain input variables and parameters. The corresponding model output vector can 

be defined as 

𝒚 = [𝑦 1 , 𝑦 2 , … , 𝑦 𝑀 ] ∈ ℝ𝑀  (1) 

where each output  𝑦 𝑚  for  𝑚 = 1,2, … , 𝑀  may represent a process performance and/ or economic 

indicator of interest. For each uncertain variable or parameter  𝜃 𝑗  , the respective lower and upper 

bounds are specified as 

𝜃 𝑗 = [𝜃 𝑗 𝐿 , 𝜃 𝑗 𝑈 ], 𝑗 = 1, … , 𝐷  (2) 

where  𝜃 𝑗 𝐿  and  𝜃 𝑗 𝑈  refer to the lower and upper bounds , respectively, of the  𝑗 𝑡 ℎ uncertain variable / 

parameter. These bounds define the joint uncertainty domain over which the Sobol screening is 

performed. 

For each model output  𝑦 𝑚  , the total -order Sobol index of the  𝑗 𝑡 ℎ uncertain variable or parameter is 

defined as 

𝑆 𝑇 𝑗 (𝑦 𝑚 ) = 1 − 𝑉𝑎𝑟 (𝔼 [𝑦 𝑚 | 𝜽 ~𝑗 ])

𝑉𝑎𝑟 (𝑦 𝑚 ) (3) 

where  𝜽 ~𝑗  represents the vector of all uncertain variables and parameters except  𝜃 𝑗  for  𝑉𝑎𝑟 (𝑦 𝑚 ) >

0. The total -order index  𝑆 𝑇 𝑗  measures the total contribution of  𝜃 𝑗  to the variance of the output  𝑦 𝑚  ,

including both its direct effect and all higher -order interaction effects with other variables and 

parameters (Puy et al., 2022; Tosin et al., 2020; Zhang et al., 2015) . The total -order Sobol index 

accounts for nonlinear interactions among various model inputs. 

In practice, the Sobol indices are estimated using a Sobol quasi -Monte Carlo sampling strategy 

(Saltelli et al., 2010) . First,  2𝑁  samples are generated in the normalized unit hypercube [0, 1]𝐷  and 

split into two base matrices defined as 

𝑈 𝐴 ∈ [0, 1]𝑁 × 𝐷 , 𝑈 𝐵 ∈ [0, 1]𝑁 ×𝐷  (4) where  𝑁  denotes the number of samples in each base matrix. These normalized samples are then 

mapped to the physical input bounds as 

𝐴 𝑛 ,𝑗 = 𝜃 𝑗 𝐿 + 𝑈 𝐴 𝑛 ,𝑗 (𝜃 𝑗 𝑈 − 𝜃 𝑗 𝐿 ) (5a) 

𝐵 𝑛 ,𝑗 = 𝜃 𝑗 𝐿 + 𝑈 𝐵 𝑛 ,𝑗 (𝜃 𝑗 𝑈 − 𝜃 𝑗 𝐿 ) (5b) 

for sample index  𝑛 = 1,2, … , 𝑁  and input index  𝑗 = 1,2, … , 𝐷 . Here,  𝐴  and  𝐵  are the two physical 

sample matrices corresponding to  𝑈 𝐴  and  𝑈 𝐵  . To estimate the contribution of each uncertain 

variable or parameter, hybrid matrices are constructed by replacing one column of  𝐴  at a time with 

the corresponding column of  𝐵 . For the  𝑗 𝑡 ℎ uncertain variable or parameter, the hybrid matrix is 

defined as 

𝐴 𝐵 (𝑗 ) = 𝐴 with column 𝑗 replaced by the 𝑗 𝑡 ℎ column of 𝐵  (6) 

Thus,  𝐴 𝐵 (𝑗 ) differs from  𝐴  only in the  𝑗 𝑡 ℎ input variable or parameter. The process model is then 

evaluated for the rows of  𝐴 , 𝐵 , and each hybrid matrix  𝐴 𝐵 (𝑗 ). Therefore, for a given output  𝑦 𝑚  , the 

corresponding model evaluations can be expressed as 

𝑌 𝐴 ,𝑚  

> (𝑛 )

= 𝑓 𝑚 (𝐴 𝑛 ,:), 𝑛 = 1, 2, … , 𝑁  (7a) 

𝑌 𝐵 ,𝑚  

> (𝑛 )

= 𝑓 𝑚 (𝐵 𝑛 ,:), 𝑛 = 1, 2, … , 𝑁  (7b) 

𝑌 𝐴 𝐵 (𝑗 ),𝑚  

> (𝑛 )

= 𝑓 𝑚 (𝐴𝐵 𝑛 ,:

> (𝑗 )

), 𝑛 = 1, 2, … , 𝑁  (7c) 

where  𝑓 𝑚 (⋅) refers to the  𝑚 𝑡 ℎ scalar model output, and  𝐴 𝑛 ,:,𝐵 𝑛 ,:, and  𝐴 𝐵 𝑛 ,: 

> (𝑗 )

denote the  𝑛 𝑡 ℎ rows of 

the corresponding sample matrices. Here,  𝑌 𝐴 ,𝑚 

> (𝑛 )

, 𝑌 𝐵 ,𝑚  

> (𝑛 )

, and  𝑌 𝐴 𝐵 (𝑗 ),𝑚  

> (𝑛 )

are the scalar model evaluations 

for the  𝑛 𝑡 ℎ sample, while the corresponding output vectors are defined as 

𝐘 𝐴 ,𝑚 = [𝑌 𝐴 ,𝑚 

> (1)

, 𝑌 𝐴 ,𝑚  

> (2)

, …, 𝑌 𝐴 ,𝑚 

> (𝑁 )

]𝑇 

(8a) 

𝐘 𝐵 ,𝑚 = [𝑌 𝐵 ,𝑚  

> (1)

, 𝑌 𝐵 ,𝑚  

> (2)

, …, 𝑌 𝐵 ,𝑚 

> (𝑁 )

]𝑇 

(8b) 

𝐘 𝐴 𝐵 (𝑗 ),𝑚 = [𝑌  

> 𝐴 𝐵 (𝑗 ),𝑚
> (1)

, 𝑌  

> 𝐴 𝐵 (𝑗 ),𝑚
> (2)

,…, 𝑌  

> 𝐴 𝐵 (𝑗 ),𝑚
> (𝑁 )

]𝑇 

(8c) The output variance for  𝑦 𝑚  is then estimated using the combined model evaluations from the two 

base matrices , given by 

𝑉 𝑦 𝑚 = 𝑉𝑎𝑟 ([𝐘 𝐴 ,𝑚 ; 𝐘 𝐵 ,𝑚 ]) (9) 

Finally, using the Saltelli estimator (Saltelli et al., 2019, 2010) , the total -order Sobol index for the  𝑗 𝑡 ℎ

uncertain variable or parameter with respect to output  𝑦 𝑚  is estimated as 

𝑆 ̂ 𝑇 𝑗 (𝑦 𝑚 ) = 1

2𝑁 ∗ 1

𝑉 𝑦 𝑚 

∗ ∑ (𝑌 𝐴 ,𝑚  

> (𝑛 )

− 𝑌 𝐴 𝐵 (𝑗 ),𝑚  

> (𝑛 )

)2

> 𝑁
> 𝑛 =1

(10) 

This estimator, as defined in Eq. (10), quantifies how strongly the output variance changes when the 

𝑗 𝑡 ℎ uncertain input is perturbed within its admissible range while accounting for the interaction 

effects with the remaining variables and parameters. 

In this work, since the process model produces multiple outputs of interest , VIBES ranks the 

uncertain variables and parameters based on their average total -order Sobol contribution across 

all selected process and /or economic outputs. Specifically, the average total -order Sobol index for 

the  𝑗 𝑡 ℎ uncertain variable or parameter can be computed as 

𝑆 ̅ 𝑇 𝑗 = 1

𝑀 ∑ 𝑆 ̂ 𝑇 𝑗 

> 𝑀
> 𝑚 =1

(𝑦 𝑚 ) (11) 

where  𝑀  is the number of outputs considered in the screening step. The dominant variables and 

parameters are then selected according to the largest values of  𝑆 ̅ 𝑇 𝑗  . For a chosen reduced -space 

dimension  𝑁 𝑡𝑜𝑝 , the selected index set is defined as 

𝓘 𝑁 𝑡𝑜𝑝 = argtop 

> 𝑁 𝑡𝑜𝑝

{𝑆 ̅ 𝑇 𝑗 }𝑗 =1

> 𝐷

(12) 

where  ℐ𝑁 𝑡𝑜𝑝  denotes the indices corresponding to the  𝑁 𝑡𝑜𝑝  largest average total -order Sobol indices. 

The resulting reduced input vector is then expressed as 

𝜽 𝑁 𝑡𝑜𝑝 = {𝜃 𝑗 ∶ 𝑗 ∈ 𝓘 𝑁 𝑡𝑜𝑝 } (13) It should be noted that VI is undertaken only for the selected subset  𝜽 𝑁 𝑡𝑜𝑝 . In this work, different 

values of  𝑁 𝑡𝑜𝑝  are also systematically evaluated to determine how the dimension of the Sobol -

selected input space affects posterior contraction and subsequent reduction in predictive 

uncertainty. 

2.2. Variational Inference 

The second stage of VIBES performs Bayesian estimation and posterior UQ over the reduced input 

space obtained from the Sobol GSA screening step. As defined in Eq. (13), the Sobol -selected 

reduced input vector is represented as  𝜽 𝑁 𝑡𝑜𝑝 

that correspond s to  𝑁 𝑡𝑜𝑝  variables and parameters with the largest average total -order Sobol 

indices (𝑆 ̅ 𝑇 𝑗 ). The objective of VI is to approximate the posterior distribution  𝑝 ( 𝜽 𝑁 𝑡𝑜𝑝 ∣∣ 𝓓 ), where 

𝓓  denotes the available measurement or target data used for Bayesian estimation. Thus, VI 

estimates the posterior distributions of the selected variables and parameters that define regions 

of the design space capable of predicting outputs consistent with available experimental or market -

derived data. Furthermore, unlike conventional sampling -based Bayesian UQ approaches, such as 

MCMC, that can be computationally intractable for nonlinear process models requiring repeated 

model evaluations , VI provides a scalable alternative by reformulating posterior estimation as an 

optimization problem. 

Specifically, the posterior distribution is approximated using a parameterized variational 

distribution  𝑞 ( 𝜽 𝑁 𝑡𝑜𝑝 ∣∣ 𝝓 ), where  𝝓  denotes the variational parameters. The optimal variational 

parameters (𝝓 ∗) are obtained by minimizing the Kullback -Leibler (KL) divergence (Blei et al., 2017; 

Thompson et al., 2026) between the variational approximation and the true posterior , given by 

𝝓 ∗ = argmin 

> 𝝓

𝐾𝐿 [𝑞 ( 𝜽 𝑁 𝑡𝑜𝑝 ∣∣ 𝝓 ) || 𝑝 ( 𝜽 𝑁 𝑡𝑜𝑝 ∣∣ 𝓓 )] (14 )

where 𝐾𝐿 [𝑞 ( 𝜽 𝑁 𝑡𝑜𝑝 ∣∣ 𝝓 ) || 𝑝 ( 𝜽 𝑁 𝑡𝑜𝑝 ∣∣ 𝓓 )] = ∫ 𝑞 ( 𝜽 𝑁 𝑡𝑜𝑝 ∣∣ 𝝓 ) log [𝑞 ( 𝜽 𝑁 𝑡𝑜𝑝 ∣∣ 𝝓 )

𝑝 ( 𝜽 𝑁 𝑡𝑜𝑝 ∣∣ 𝓓 )] 𝑑 𝜽 𝑁 𝑡𝑜𝑝  (15 )

The KL -divergence minimization formulation as described in Eq. ( 14 ) can be equivalently expressed 

as negative evidence lower bound (ELBO) objective comprising three competing contributions. 

Specifically, the VI objective function can be defined as 

𝐽 (𝝓 ) = 𝔼 𝑞 [− log 𝑝 ( 𝓓 ∣∣ 𝜽 𝑁 𝑡𝑜𝑝 )] − 𝔼 𝑞 [log 𝑝 (𝜽 𝑁 𝑡𝑜𝑝 )] − 𝐻 [𝑞 ( 𝜽 𝑁 𝑡𝑜𝑝 ∣∣ 𝝓 )] (16 )

where the entropy of the variational distribution is represented as 

𝐻 [𝑞 ( 𝜽 𝑁 𝑡𝑜𝑝 ∣∣ 𝝓 )] = −𝔼 𝑞 [log 𝑞 ( 𝜽 𝑁 𝑡𝑜𝑝 ∣∣ 𝝓 )] (17 )

The entropy, as defined in Eq. ( 17 ), preserves uncertainty in regions of the input space where limited 

or no experimental / market data are available, thus allowing broader predictive spreads when the 

data do not strongly constrain the posterior (Blei et al., 2017; Wang et al., 2023) .

Therefore, the VI objective function as defined in Eq. ( 16 ), can be updated as 

𝐽 (𝝓 ) = 𝔼 𝑞 [− log 𝑝 ( 𝓓 ∣∣ 𝜽 𝑁 𝑡𝑜𝑝 )] + 𝔼 𝑞 [− log 𝑝 (𝜽 𝑁 𝑡𝑜𝑝 )] + 𝔼 𝑞 [log 𝑞 ( 𝜽 𝑁 𝑡𝑜𝑝 ∣∣ 𝝓 )] (18 )

The first term in Eq. (18 ) minimizes the error between model predictions and available 

process/economic target data, the second term penalizes deviation from the prior distribution, and 

the third term maximizes the entropy of the variational distribution while promoting a non -

degenerate posterior approximation. Thus, VI enables simultaneous estimation and UQ of the 

Sobol -selected parameters and variables. 

In this work, a diagonal Gaussian variational distribution is considered for the Sobol -selected 

variables and parameters. For each selected variable or parameter  𝜃 𝑗  , the reparameterized 

representation is defined as 

𝜃 𝑗 = 𝜇 𝑗 + 𝜎 𝑗 𝑧 𝑗 , 𝑗 = 1, 2, … , 𝑁 𝑡𝑜𝑝  (19a )

𝑧 𝑗 ~ 𝒩 (0,1) (19b )where  𝜇 𝑗  and  𝜎 𝑗  are the variational mean and standard deviation associated with the  𝑗 𝑡 ℎ selected 

variable or parameter, and  𝑧 𝑗  is a standard normal (Gaussian) random variable. Therefore, the 

variational parameters are given by  𝝓 = [𝝁 , 𝝈 ]. To improve the numerical stability of VI, a warm -

start initialization strategy is implemented. Let the bank of successful model evaluations generated 

during the Sobol GSA screening stage be denoted as 

𝓓 ∗ = {(𝜽 𝑁 𝑡𝑜𝑝  

> (𝑟 )

,𝒚 (𝑟 ) )}𝑟 =1

> 𝑁 𝑏𝑎𝑛𝑘

(20 )

where  𝑁 𝑏𝑎𝑛𝑘  represents the number of successful model simulations available from the Sobol 

sampling stage,  𝜽 𝑁 𝑡𝑜𝑝  

> (𝑟 )

contains the Sobol -selected variables and parameters for the  𝑟 𝑡 ℎ successful 

model simulation, and  𝒚 (𝑟 ) denotes the corresponding simulated process and economic output 

vector s. Subsequently, the output misfit for each stored sample can be computed as 

ℰ(𝑟 ) = ∑ ‖𝒚 𝑚  

> (𝑟 )

− 𝒚 𝑚  

> 𝑜𝑏𝑠

‖2

> 𝑀
> 𝑚 =1

, 𝑟 = 1, 2, … , 𝑁 𝑏𝑎𝑛𝑘  (21 )

where  𝒚 𝑚  

> 𝑜𝑏𝑠

is the vector of mean observed or target value s of the  𝑚 𝑡 ℎ output. Out of all  𝑁 𝑏𝑎𝑛𝑘 

samples, the  𝑃  samples with the smallest misfit values are selected as 

𝒫 = argmin 

> 𝑃

{ℰ(𝑟 )}𝑟 =1

> 𝑁 𝑏𝑎𝑛𝑘

(22 )

where  𝒫  denotes the indices corresponding to the  𝑃  lowest misfit values. The means and standard 

deviations of these  𝑃  samples are then used to initialize the corresponding variational parameters 

𝝁  and  𝝈 , respectively. This warm -start strategy reuses information already generated during the 

screening stage and initializes VI near regions of the reduced input space that produce model 

outputs close to the available experimental or market target s. In addition, the Sobol -sampled 

model simulation with the smallest output misfit is defined as the base case 

𝑟 𝑏𝑎𝑠𝑒 = argmin 

> 𝑟

ℰ(𝑟 ) , 𝜽 𝑏𝑎𝑠𝑒 = 𝜽 (𝑟 𝑏𝑎𝑠𝑒 ) (23 )

where  𝜽 𝑏𝑎𝑠𝑒  denotes the complete input vector corresponding to the model simulation whose 

predicted outputs are closest to the experimental or observed data  𝒚 𝑜𝑏𝑠  .During the final posterior predictive uncertainty propagation step, the Sobol -screened variables 

and parameters are sampled from the optimized variational posterior, while the non -selected 

variables and parameters are fixed at their corresponding base -case values  𝜽 𝑏𝑎𝑠𝑒  . This allows the 

posterior uncertainty to be propagated through the high -fidelity model while maintaining a 

consistent and target -informed reference point for the variables and parameters that were not 

included in the reduced VI space. For the specific implementation used in this work, the likelihood, 

prior, and variational distributions are assumed to be Gaussian. Let  𝐾  denote the number of 

samples used to estimate the stochastic VI objective. Therefore, the samples from the variational 

distribution are obtained using the reparameterization, defined as 

𝜽 𝑁 𝑡𝑜𝑝  

> (𝑘 )

= 𝝁 + 𝝈 ⊙ 𝒛 (𝑘 ) , 𝒛 (𝑘 ) ~ 𝒩 (𝟎 , 𝑰 ), 𝑘 = 1, … , 𝐾  (24 )

where  ⊙ denotes element -wise multiplication. Subsequently, the corresponding model 

predictions for the  𝑘 𝑡 ℎ variational sample can be represented as: 

𝒚 ̂ (𝑘 ) = 𝑓 (𝜽 𝑁 𝑡𝑜𝑝  

> (𝑘 )

) (25 )

where  𝑓 (⋅) represents the process model or its differentiable surrogate during parameter estimation 

through VI. Under these assumptions , the simplified negative -ELBO objective function (Zhang et al., 

2019) as defined in Eq. ( 20 ), after removal of all terms independent of  𝝓 , can be expressed as 

𝐽 (𝝁 , 𝝈 ) = 1

𝐾 ∑ ∑ ‖𝒚 ̂ 𝑚 (𝜽 𝑁 𝑡𝑜𝑝  

> (𝑘 )

) − 𝒚 𝑚  

> 𝑜𝑏𝑠

‖

> 𝑀
> 𝑚 =1
> 2𝐾
> 𝑘 =1

+ ∑ 𝜇 𝑗  

> 2

+ 𝜎 𝑗 2

2𝛼 𝑗  

> 2
> 𝑁 𝑡𝑜𝑝
> 𝑗 =1

− ∑ log 𝜎 𝑗  

> 𝑁 𝑡𝑜𝑝
> 𝑗 =1

(26 )

where  𝛼 𝑗  represents the prior standard deviation of the  𝑗 𝑡 ℎ Sobol -selected variable or parameter. 

Thus, minimizing  𝐽 (𝝁 , 𝝈 ) simultaneously improves model fit against target data, regularizes the 

inferred variables and parameters, and promotes a non -degenerate posterior uncertainty 

representation. 

The optimization of the VI objective is carried out using stochastic gradient descent (SGD) based 

optimization. When the underlying process model is differentiable and derivative information can 

be accessed directly, AD or solver -provided derivative information may be used to compute gradients of the VI objective with respect to the variational parameters. However, many process 

simulators, techno -economic models, and external software platforms do not provide gradients in 

a form directly compatible with modern AD libraries. In such cases, a differentiable surrogate model 

can be trained using process -model evaluations over the Sobol -selected reduced input space. The 

trained surrogate provides a differentiable approximation of the input -output mapping over the 

reduced space, enabling JAX -based AD (Alves et al., 2025; Lin, 2024) during VI. After the surrogate 

model is trained, the VI objective is minimized using Adam over the variational parameters  𝝓 =

[𝝁 , 𝝈 ]. At each iteration, samples are drawn from the standard normal distribution, transformed into 

samples of the Sobol -selected variables and parameters through the reparameterization, passed 

through the differentiable surrogate, and used to estimate the stocha stic VI loss. Gradients of this 

loss with respect to the variational parameters are computed using automatic differentiation and 

used to update  𝝓 .

The proposed approach eventually yields the optimized variational parameters  𝝓 ∗ = [𝝁 ∗, 𝝈 ∗] which 

define the approximate posterior distribution over the selected variables and parameters, given by 

𝑞 ( 𝜽 𝑁 𝑡𝑜𝑝 ∣∣ 𝝓 ∗ ) ≈ 𝑝 ( 𝜽 𝑁 𝑡𝑜𝑝 ∣∣ 𝓓 ) (27 )

Finally, posterior samples are generated from the optimized variational distribution and propagated 

through the high -fidelity model to evaluate posterior predictive uncertainty. During this final 

propagation step, the Sobol -selected variables and parameters are sam pled from  𝑞 ( 𝜽 𝑁 𝑡𝑜𝑝 ∣∣ 𝝓 ∗ ),

while the non -selected variables and parameters are fixed at their corresponding base -case values ,

as shown in Eq. ( 23 ). The resulting predictive distribution can be expressed as  𝑝 (𝒚 ̂ | 𝜽 𝑁 𝑡𝑜𝑝 , 𝓓 ),

where  𝒚 ̂ denotes the model predicted process and /or economic outputs. Although a differentiable 

surrogate is used to enable scalable VI during posterior estimation, final posterior predictive 

uncertainty is evaluated using the high -fidelity model. This allows VIBES to exploit the fidelity of the 

underlying process simulator f or UQ in process and economic performance metrics, while retaining 

the scalability (Mukherjee and Zavala, 2026) of surrogate assisted VI. 2.3. Multi -Software Integration Platform 

The VIBES methodology is independent of a specific process modeling or computational 

environment. When the process and/or economic model, sensitivity analysis, and Bayesian UQ 

tools are all available within a common software ecosystem, the framework can be implemented 

without constructing a multi -software computational platform. For example, a process model 

developed directly in Python (e.g., using BioSTEAM (Cortes -Peña et al., 2020) ) can be coupled 

directly with scientific computing tools for data analytics, ML, and Bayesian estimation . In many 

practical process systems engineering applications, however, different software platforms are 

better suited for different components of the computational workflow. It may be more convenient 

to undertake rigorous process simulation, flowsheet development, thermodynamic modeling, 

physical property estimation, and equipment -level calculations in commercial process simulation 

software like Aspen Plus, Aspen Custom Modeler, gPROMS, Chemcad, AVEVA, etc . Likewise, TEA 

may be performed using specialized tools such as Aspen Process Economic Analyzer (APEA) or 

other economic -analysis platforms. In contrast, scientific computing environments such as Python 

provide flexible access to modern packages for GSA , ML , differentiable programming, stochastic 

optimization, Bayesian estimation, and visualization. 

Selection of software platform(s) can lead to challenge s for scalable end -to -end uncertainty -aware 

process systems engineering tools . From the perspective of Bayesian UQ, it is necessary to have 

derivative information available from the external process simulator , if used for process/economic 

modeling, in a form compatible with AD tools . However , for many leading process simulation 

software, this may be challenging to obtain the desired information in the desired form. Overall , an 

integration platform is desired to facilitate automate d data transfer, repeated model evaluation, 

output extraction, surrogate model development when required , and posterior predictive 

uncertainty propagation. VIBES facilitates a multi -software integration platform that can 

accomplish these desired objectives .

In the present work, the proposed platform is implemented through a Windows Component Object 

Model (COM) interface using the ‘win32com ’ package, enabling communication between Aspen 

Plus (v14.0 ) and Python (3.12.5 ). Although several studies have used COM -based interfaces to connect the Aspen ecosystem with Python, either through Aspen tree nodes (Nikkhah et al., 2024) 

or MS Excel add -ins (Urm et al., 2023) , these approaches have generally been limited to separate 

sampling and optimization workflows. In contrast, this work implements a multi -software 

integration platform that automates techno -economic model simulations within an end -to -end 

framework for simu ltaneous parameter estimation and Bayesian UQ . Specifically, the plant -wide 

process model for manufacturing KL -SPI bioadhesive is developed in Aspen Plus. Although the 

corresponding economic analysis can be performed using APEA, for computational flexibility, the 

economic evaluation is also conducted within the Aspen Plus environment using a cost model 

implemented through Fortran codes within Calculator blocks (Das and Bhattacharyya, 2026b; 

Turton et al., 2018) . This design choice enables process simulation and economic evaluation to be 

performed within the same executable process modeling environment (i.e., Aspen Plus) , thereby 

allowing automated extraction of both process and economic outputs through a multi -software 

integration platform represented as the Python -Aspen interface in this paper . The subsequent Sobol 

GSA, surrogate -assisted VI , posterior estimation, and uncertainty propagation are performed in 

Python. Thus , the Python -Aspen interface serves as the central computational layer for automated 

sampling, process simulation, economic model evaluation, sensitivity analysis, Bayesian 

estimation, and posterior predictive UQ in this work. 

The integrated VIBES framework developed in this work is shown in Fig. 1. Fig. 1. Overall computational workflow for the proposed VIBES algorithm. 

## 3. Case Study: Bioadhesive Production Process 

The proposed VIBES framework is demonstrated on a lignocellulosic biomass derived 

formaldehyde -free adhesive production process involving BCD of kraft lignin followed by 

crosslinking with SPI (Das and Bhattacharyya, 2026; Jiang et al., 2023). The steady -st ate plant -wide 

process model is developed in Aspen Plus (v14.0), and a simplified process flow diagram is 

presented in Fig. 2. The extensive plant -wide modeling and techno -economic optimization 

framework for the KL -SPI bioadhesive production process under consideration has been discussed 

by Das and Bhattacharyya (Das and Bhattacharyya, 2026), while the relevant experimental details 

can be found in the study reported by Jiang et al. (Jiang et al., 2023). 

In this process, kraft lignin is first mixed with 0.37 wt.% NaOH (aq) solution at 25 °C and atmospheric 

pressure in M -101. The resulting mixture is then pumped to 18 atm to facilitate BCD of kraft lignin at 

140 to 200 °C while maintaining solvent (i.e., water) in the liquid phase. The pressurized feed is 

heated to the desired reaction temperature in a shell -and -tube heat exchanger (E -101) using high 

pressure (HP) steam before entering the depolymerization reactor (R -101). The reactor outlet, containing D -lignin, monomers, small organic compounds (SOCs), and repolymerized species, is 

cooled to 55 °C in E -102 using cooling water (CW) and sent to a flash drum (D -101), where gaseous 

by -products are separated from the liquid stream. On the other ha nd, SPI is dissolved in water at 25 

°C and ambient pressure in M -102 and heated to 55 °C in E -103 using low pressure (LP) steam. The 

D-lignin -rich stream from D -101 is then mixed with the heated SPI solution in an agitated vessel (R -

102) to facilitate crosslinking reactions and form the KL -SPI bioadhesive. Excess water is removed 

from the bioadhesive mixture through controlled heating and flash evap oration in D -102, reducing 

the solution volume by 75%. Finally, the product stream is cooled to 25 °C in E -107 using CW. 

Fig. 2. Simplified process flow diagram for KL -SPI bioadhesive manufacturing process considered 

for implementation of the VIBES framework. 

As discussed before, for computational flexibility, the economic evaluation is also implemented 

within the Aspen Plus environment using a simplified cost model that can generate results 

consistent with conventional APEA estimates (Das and Bhattacharyya, 2026b; Mevawala et al., 

2019; Ogunniyan et al., 2024) . The empirical correlations, equipment -specific correction factors, 

cost equations, and inflation factors required to calculate capital and operating costs are incorporated directly in Aspen Plus using Fortran codes within Calculator blocks (Das and 

Bhattacharyya, 2026b; Turton et al., 2018) . This implementation enables process simulation and 

economic evaluation to be performed within the same Aspen workflow, thereby facilitating 

automated output extraction and downstream uncertainty analysis through the Python -Aspen 

interface. Further detail s of this economic evaluation framework are discussed extensively in the 

work by Das and Bhattacharyya (Das and Bhattacharyya, 2026b) .

In this work, t he proposed VIBES framework requires repeated simulation of th e bioadhesive 

manufacturing process (shown in Fig. 2) in Aspen Plus under different combinations of uncertain 

kinetic, design/operating, and economic variables and parameters. Therefore, the multi -software 

integration platform, as discussed in Section 2.3, becomes significantly crucial for integration and 

automation of Aspen Plus simulations with Python -based sensitivity analysis and Bayesian 

inference. Thus , the Python -Aspen interface forms the computational backbone of VIBES. As noted 

earlier, t he Python -Aspen interface is implemented via the Windows COM framework. First, the 

Aspen Plus variable paths to the uncertain inputs and outputs are identified from the Aspen variable 

explorer. These paths, in turn, allow the workflow to assign sampled inputs, run Aspen simulations, 

extract model outputs, and save successful simulated results for downstream sensi tivity analyses 

and Bayesian estimation. For example, Code Snippet 1 shows the basic helper functions for 

establishing the Python -Aspen interaction, such as, accessing Aspen tree nodes ( get_node ), 

initializing the Aspen Plus archive file from Python ( open_aspen ), and closing the Aspen session 

(close_aspen ) after simulation. 

Since large -scale sampling analyses may include several input combinations that lead to non -

converged Aspen simulations, additional functions are defined to reinitialize or restart Aspen during 

the automated workflow. As shown in Code Snippet 2, Aspen Plus is reinitialized after each run. The 

interface first attempts to reinitialize Aspen using available COM methods. However, if 

reinitialization is insufficient after repeated simulation failures, the Aspen session is closed and 

restarted from the original archive file. This restart mechanism is helpful to the automated sampling 

algorithm. After each Aspen simulation, the required process and economic outputs, such as D -lignin mass flow rate and LCOA, are extracted from the corresponding Aspen tree paths and stored 

for subsequent analysis. 

Code Snippet 1 : Helper functions for developing the Python -Aspen interaction framework. 

def get_node (aspen, path: str ): 

node = aspen. Tree .FindNode (path) 

if node is None :

raise ValueError( f“Could not find Aspen node: {path} ”)

return node 

def open_aspen (aspen_file: str ): 

aspen = win32. Dispatch (“Apwn.Document” )

aspen. InitFromArchive2 (os. path .abspath (aspen_file)) 

return aspen 

def close_aspen (aspen) -> None :

try :

aspen. Close () 

except Exception: 

pass 

Code Snippet 2 : Reinitialization and restart functions defined for automated Aspen simulations. 

def reset_aspen_simulation (aspen) -> None :

try :

aspen. Reinit () 

return 

except Exception: 

pass 

try :

aspen. Engine.Reinit () 

return 

except Exception: 

pass 

try :

aspen. Engine.Reset () 

return 

except Exception: 

pass 

def restart_aspen (aspen, aspen_file: str ): 

close_aspen(aspen) 

return open_aspen(aspen_file) The proposed approach then proceeds iteratively by passing each sampled input combination to 

Aspen Plus, followed by simulating the model, extracting outputs, and saving successful runs, while 

failed simulations are logged separately for diagnostics. The a utomated simulation approach 

implemented through the Python -Aspen interface is summarized in Algorithm 1. 

The proposed algorithm provides sufficient flexibility to accommodate alternate variance -based 

sampling methods other than Sobol GSA . Although , the overall computational workflow is 

demonstrated in Section 2. 3 using Sobol GSA (Saltelli et al., 2019, 2010) as the screening step , the 

proposed approach holds true only w hen all Aspen Plus generated samples converge . However, if 

failed Aspen evaluations prevent completion of the structured Sobol design, alternative variance -

based screening methods such as the random balance design Fourier amplitude sensitivity test 

(Goffart and Woloszyn, 2021) (RBD -FAST) can be utilize d. 

In the present work, the Sobol GSA stage, a total of 20 uncertain input variables and parameters are 

initially considered, ranging across kinetic, design/operating, and economic sources of uncertainty, 

as summarized in Table 1. These include feed flow rates, reactor operating conditions, activation 

energies for the BCD reaction network, raw material prices, utility prices, and other economi c

parameters. However, among these 20 quantities, three process variables are not treated as 

independent Sobol variables because they are constrained through design assumptions to ensure 

process convergence and practical operation , as given by 

𝐹 ̇𝑆𝑃𝐼 = 2 ∗ 𝐹 ̇𝐾𝐿  (28a) 

𝐹 ̇𝑊 1 = 20 ∗ 𝐹 ̇𝐾𝐿  (28b) 

𝐹 ̇𝑊 2 = 10 ∗ 𝐹 ̇𝑆𝑃𝐼  (28c) 

where  𝐹 ̇𝐾𝐿 , 𝐹 ̇𝑆𝑃𝐼  , 𝐹 ̇𝑊 1, and  𝐹 ̇𝑊 2 represents the mass flow rates of kraft lignin, SPI, kraft lignin solvent 

(W1), and SPI solvent (W2), respectively. As a result, the effective number of independent uncertain 

variables and parameters used for Sobol screening becomes  𝐷 = 17 . Therefore, for  𝑁 = 128  quasi -

random Sobol samples per variable in each base matrix, the total number of Aspen Plus model 

evaluations  (𝑁 𝑠𝑖𝑚 ) required for this Sobol GSA stage can be calculated as 

𝑁 𝑠𝑖𝑚 = 𝑁 ∗ (𝐷 + 2) = 128 ∗ (17 + 2) = 2432  (29) Algorithm 1 : Automated Python -Aspen simulation workflow for variance -based sampling. 

Given : Aspen Plus .bkp file, uncertain input bounds, Aspen variable paths, total number of samples 

𝑁 𝑠𝑎𝑚 , and maximum allowable consecutive convergence failures  𝑁 𝑓𝑎𝑖𝑙 , 𝑚𝑎𝑥 

Define the uncertain kinetic, design / operating, and economic variables and parameters 

Generate input samples using a variance -based sampling method, e.g., Sobol, RBD -FAST, etc. 

Access the Aspen Plus model through the Python -Aspen COM interface 

Initialize : 𝑛 𝑠𝑎𝑚 = 1, 𝑛 𝑓𝑎𝑖𝑙 = 0

while  𝑛 𝑠𝑎𝑚 ≤ 𝑁 𝑠𝑎𝑚  do 

Select the  𝑛 𝑠𝑎𝑚  -th sampled input combination 

Assign sampled input values to the corresponding Aspen Plus input nodes 

Run the Aspen Plus simulation 

if Aspen simulation converges successfully then 

Extract process and economic outputs from the Aspen Plus output nodes 

Store sampled inputs and extracted outputs as a successful simulation run 

Reinitialize Aspen Plus 

𝑛 𝑓𝑎𝑖𝑙 = 0

else 

Store sampled inputs and failure message in the failed simulation log 

Reinitialize Aspen Plus 

𝑛 𝑓𝑎𝑖𝑙 = 𝑛 𝑓𝑎𝑖𝑙 + 1

if  𝑛 𝑓𝑎𝑖𝑙 ≥ 𝑁 𝑓𝑎𝑖𝑙 , 𝑚𝑎𝑥  then 

Close the current Aspen Plus session and restart Aspen Plus from original .bkp file 

𝑛 𝑓𝑎𝑖𝑙 = 0

end if 

end if 

𝑛 𝑠𝑎𝑚 = 𝑛 𝑠𝑎𝑚 + 1

end while 

Save the successful simulation dataset and failed simulation log 

Close the Aspen Plus session 

Return : successful simulation dataset (model inputs and outputs), failed simulation log Ideally, Bayesian estimation requires measured experimental data or market -based target data for 

the process and economic outputs of interest. However, the KL -SPI bioadhesive process 

considered in this work is an emerging biomass valorization technology, for which practical 

implementation at pilot or commercial scale remains limited (Das and Bhattacharyya, 2026b) .

Table 1 

List of uncertain i nput variables and parameters considered for Sobol GSA. 

No.  Input Variables / Parameters  Range  Unit 

1 Kraft lignin mass flow rate (𝐹 𝐾𝐿 ) [400, 600]  kg/h 

2 W1 / Kraft lignin solvent mass flow rate (𝐹 𝑊 1) constrained (Eq. 28b ) kg/h 

3 SPI mass flow rate (𝐹 𝑆𝑃𝐼 ) constrained (Eq. 28a ) kg/h 

4 W2 / SPI solvent mass flow rate (𝐹 𝑊 2) constrained (Eq. 28c ) kg/h 

5 BCD reactor pressure (𝑃 𝑟 ) [15, 25]  atm 

6 BCD reaction 1 activation energy (𝐸 𝑎 ,𝑅 1) [30, 70]  kJ/mol 

7 BCD reaction 2 activation energy (𝐸 𝑎 ,𝑅 2) [25, 45]  kJ/mol 

8 BCD reaction 3 activation energy (𝐸 𝑎 ,𝑅 3) [25, 45]  kJ/mol 

9 BCD reaction 4 activation energy (𝐸 𝑎 ,𝑅 4) [25, 45]  kJ/mol 

10  BCD reaction 5 activation energy (𝐸 𝑎 ,𝑅 5) [25, 45]  kJ/mol 

11  BCD feed temperature (𝑇 𝐾𝐿 ) [140, 200]  ° C

12  SPI temperature (𝑇 𝑆𝑃𝐼 ) [50, 60]  ° C

13  Kraft lignin price (𝐶𝑜𝑠 𝑡 𝐾𝐿 ) [0.15, 0.75]  $/kg 

14  SPI price (𝐶𝑜𝑠 𝑡 𝑆𝑃𝐼 ) [1.5, 3.0]  $/kg 

15  𝑁𝑎𝑂𝐻  price (𝐶𝑜𝑠 𝑡 𝑁𝑎𝑂𝐻 ) [0.20, 0.65]  $/kg 

16  process water price (𝐶𝑜𝑠 𝑡 𝑊 ) [1e -4, 3e -4]  $/kg 

17  high pressure (HP) steam price (𝐶𝑜𝑠 𝑡 𝐻𝑃𝑆 ) [5.0, 12.0]  $/GJ 

18  low pressure ( LP ) steam price (𝐶𝑜𝑠 𝑡 𝐿𝑃𝑆 ) [4.0, 7.0]  $/GJ 

19  cooling water (CW) price (𝐶𝑜𝑠 𝑡 𝐶𝑊 ) [0.1, 0.5]  $/GJ 

20  electricity price (𝐶𝑜𝑠 𝑡 𝐸 ) [0.05, 0.10]  $/kWh Although a few studies have reported the production and evaluation of lignocellulosic biomass -

based adhesive s (Chen et al., 2024, 2021; Yang and Rosentrater, 2019a, 2019b) , available data are 

not necessarily specific to the KL -SPI bio adhesive production pathway considered here, nor do they 

provide sufficient process -level and economic target data for the outputs used in this study. 

In summary, to the best of our knowledge, there is a very limited availability of experimental and/or 

market data for directly specifying target values or distributions for D -lignin mass flow rate and 

LCOA . Therefore, in this work, two data -generation approaches are considered to demonstrate the 

VI -based inverse UQ workflow. In the first approach, the measured data are represented as single -

value target outputs for both D -lignin mass flow rate and LCOA, obtai ned from the high -fidelity 

process model and techno -economic optimization framework reported by Das and Bhattacharyya 

(Das and Bhattacharyya, 2026b) for this specific novel technology, with additional Gaussian noise 

imposed to represent measurement and market uncertainty. In the second approach, a synthetic -

data generation strategy is adopted, where multiple observations are generated to mimic 

experimental or market data for use during optimization. These synthetic data serve as relevant 

target data for demonstrating the inverse UQ workflow and can be directly replaced by measured 

experimental data, pilot -plant data, or market -derived targets when this information becomes 

available. Specifically, t he second strategy involving generation of synthetic measured data is 

based on propagating uncertainty in the kinetic, design/ operating, and economic input variables 

and parameters through the Aspen Plus process model. 

First, feasible ranges are assigned to uncertain inputs based on available literature information for 

similar systems, raw material and utility price ranges, process operating windows, and kinetic or 

design assumptions. For instance , the kraft lignin mass flow rate for commercial -scale plants has 

been reported to be approximately 500 –530 kg /h (Ahire et al., 2024; Das and Bhattacharyya, 2026b) .

Similarly, the ranges for kraft lignin and SPI price s consistent with commercial chemical -market 

information platforms are approximately 0.25 -0.50 $ /kg (Abdelaziz et al., 2020; Das and 

Bhattacharyya, 2026b; Kulas et al., 2021) and 1.8 -2.4 $ /kg (ChemAnalyst, 2026; Das and 

Bhattacharyya, 2026b; Elchemy Chemical Market, 2026) , respectively . Kinetic uncertainty can be 

characterized using reported ranges for activation energies of the major reaction steps; for example, published values for lignin depolymerization commonly span approximately 49 -55 kJ /mol (Das and 

Bhattacharyya, 2026b; Forchheim et al., 2014) . These ranges for the input variables and parameters 

consistent with the literature and/or commercial databases provide a basis for defining a plausible 

design space while generating synthetic data. Representative input samples are then generated 

from these ranges, for example using Gaussian distributions centered around nominal or literature -

informed values, and the corresponding process/economic outputs are obtained from Aspen Plus 

simulations using the Python -Aspen interface . In this way, synthetic output data are generated 

systematically from physically meaningful combinations of uncertain input variables and 

parameters. The underlying premise is that, in the absence of direct experimental or market 

observations for the output variables, uncertainty in the outputs can be attributed to uncertainty in 

the underlying input space. Accordingly, the inverse UQ problem seeks to estimate posterior 

distributions of the dominant variables and parameters that are most consistent with the observed 

or synthetically generated output targets. This formulation allows the VIBES framework to iden tify 

plausible regions of the design and uncertainty space, reduce predictive uncertainty in process and 

economic metrics, and provide guidance for future experiments or data collection by identifying the 

variables and parameters that most strongly influen ce the target outputs. 

## 4. Results and Discussions 

This section first presents the results of the Sobol GSA used to characterize the uncertainty 

structure of the bioadhesive production process and identify the dominant set of variables and 

parameters that govern the target process and economic performance metrics. The resulting 

reduced input space is subsequently used for VI -based Bayesian inference and posterior predictive 

UQ, corresponding to both data generation approaches described in Section 3. 

4.1. Results from Sobol Sensitivity Screening 

As discussed in Eq. ( 29 ), Sobol GSA is performed over  𝐷 = 17 -dimensional independent uncertain 

input space, thus leading to 2432 Aspen Plus model evaluations generated through the automated 

Python -Aspen interface. As noted earlier, although Table 1 lists 20 uncertain input variables and 

parameters, 3 mass flow rates are determined through the design constraints as defined in Eqs. 

(28a )–(28c ) and are therefore not independently sampled during Sobol screening. Overall , Fig . 3illustrates the sampled values of all 20 input variables and parameters including 17 independent 

inputs sampled from Sobol GSA , and 3 dependent inputs corresponding to the design constraints 

under consideration . These samples define the prior uncertainty bounds of the input variables and 

parameters before Bayesian estimation. 

Fig . 3. Prior samples of all 20 uncertain input variables and parameters obtained from Sobol GSA ,

labeled according to the respective numbering defined in Table 1. 

The corresponding economic and process output results obtained from the successful Aspen Plus 

simulations are shown in Fig. 4. These result s of the output variables, namely the LCOA (that 

characterizes economic performance of the KL -SPI production pathway) and D -lignin mass flow 

rate (that characterizes process performance), are used to generate the prior predictive uncertainty 

bounds of model outputs before Bayesian inference. Using the successful Sobol samples, the 

average total -order Sobol indices (𝑆 ̅ 𝑇 𝑗 ) defined in Eq. (11) are computed with respect to both model 

outputs. Since the cumulative contribution of the top 5 highest -ranked input variables and parameters based 

on  𝑆 ̅ 𝑇 𝑗  captures more than  99%  of the total averaged output variance, in this work, the reduced input 

space dimension is selected as  𝑁 𝑡𝑜𝑝 = 5. Table 2 lists this sequence of 5 dominant variables and 

parameters ranked according to their respective  𝑆 ̅ 𝑇 𝑗  values. Accordingly, the reduced input vector, 

as defined in Eq. (13), to be considered for the subsequent VI stage is given by 

𝜽 𝑁 𝑡𝑜𝑝 = 𝜽 5 = {𝐹 𝐾𝐿 , 𝐶𝑜𝑠 𝑡 𝑆𝑃𝐼 , 𝐶𝑜𝑠 𝑡 𝐾𝐿 , 𝐸 𝑎 ,𝑅 1, 𝐸 𝑎 ,𝑅 2 }𝑇  (30 )

Fig . 4. Prior predictive results of model outputs represented by (a) KL -SPI bioadhesive levelized cost 

and (b) D-lignin mass flow rate obtained from Sobol GSA. 

The results obtained from Sobol GSA confirm that a relatively small subset of uncertain variables 

and parameters governs the majority of uncertainty in the selected process and economic outputs. 

This sensitivity -driven reduction avoids performing Bayesian estimation over the full input space 

and provides a computationally tractable basis for subsequent posterior estimation a nd predictive 

uncertainty propagation. 

4.2. Results from VI 

This section presents the VI -based Bayesian estimation and posterior predictive UQ results 

obtained after Sobol screening. In this work, the surrogate is constructed as a feedforward neural 

network (NN) model with two hidden layers, eight neurons per hidden layer, and hyperbolic tangent activation functions (Mukherjee and Bhattacharyya, 2023) . The input and output data are 

normalized before training, and the surrogate parameters are optimized using the Adam optimizer. 

Table 2

List of top 5 dominant uncertain input variables and parameters identified through Sobol GSA, 

ranked as per their respective averaged total -order Sobol indices. 

Rank  Selected Input Variable / Parameter  𝑺 ̅𝑻 𝒋 

1 KL mass flow rate (𝐹 𝐾𝐿 ) 0.508 

2 SPI price (𝐶𝑜𝑠 𝑡 𝑆𝑃𝐼 ) 0.445 

3 KL price (𝐶𝑜𝑠 𝑡 𝐾𝐿 ) 0.018 

4 BCD reaction 1 activation energy (𝐸 𝑎 ,𝑅 1) 0.014 

5 BCD reaction 2 activation energy (𝐸 𝑎 ,𝑅 2) 0.009 

As discussed in Section 4.1, Sobol GSA identifies the dominant uncertain variables and parameters 

governing the D -lignin mass flow rate and KL -SPI bioadhesive LCOA. Within the proposed 

framework, variability in process and economic performance is interpreted as the combined effect 

of uncertainty in kinetic, design/operating, and economic variables and parameters. Accordingly, 

the inverse UQ problem seeks posterior distributions of the Sobol -selected inputs that are 

consistent with the observed ranges of the target model outputs. The warm -start strategy described 

in Section 2. 2 is implemented for both data -generation approaches considered in the VI -based 

inverse UQ workflow. For the single -value -target approach, the warm -start samples are selected 

according to their residuals relative to the specified (true) target outputs obtained from literature -

reported simulation of the novel high -fidelity process model for the bioadhesive production 

technology (Das and Bhattacharyya, 2026b) considered in this work . However, for the synthetic -

data approach, the base case is identified using the residual with respect to the mean value of the 

corresponding generated (measurement) output s mimicking experimental or market data . This 

base case provides the fixed values of non -selected variables and parameters during final posterior 

predictive uncertainty propagation through the high -fidelity Aspen Plus model. Additionally, for the 

second approach (i.e., synthetic data generation), the dominant uncertain variables and 

parameters are sampled from normal distributions whose means and variances are selected using ranges reported in available literature and public databases (Ahire et al., 2024; ChemAnalyst, 2026; 

Das and Bhattacharyya, 2026b; Forchheim et al., 2014; Kulas et al., 2021) . In this work, a total of 30 

synthetic observation samples is used for Bayesian estimation and UQ. 

For both the approaches considered in this paper, sensitivity analyses are performed to quantify 

and contrast the relative uncertainty reductions in both posterior parameter / variable and 

predictive distributions with respect to the dimensionality of the reduced input space, i.e.,  𝑁 𝑡𝑜𝑝 .

Corresponding to each value of  𝑁 𝑡𝑜𝑝 = 1, 2, …, 5 , the surrogate NN model described in at the 

beginning of this section is trained for the Sobol -sampled simulation data for 5000 epochs. The 

respective training computational (CPU) times remain approximately consistent at 70 –80 seconds 

across the different reduced input space dimensionality values. For instance, the surrogate NN 

model trained for the reduced input vector defined in Eq. ( 30 ), i.e.,  𝜽 5 for  𝑁 𝑡𝑜𝑝 = 5, yields root mean 

squared error (RMSE) values of around 0.009  $/kg  (approximately 1.15 % ) and 27.5  kg /h

(approximately 0.26 % ) for LCOA and D -lignin mass flow rate, respectively. These results indicate 

that the surrogate model provides an accurate approximation of the high -fidelity Aspen Plus model 

for gradient -based VI optimization. For all cases, VI is performed over the Sobol -screened reduced 

input space using mini -batch SGD with the Adam optimizer. In this work, 5 variational samples are 

used per mini -batch, and optimization is conducted for 1000 epochs subject to the same 

initialization using gradients obtained through JAX -based AD of the trained surrogate model. After 

convergence, 500 samples are drawn from the learned variational distribution and propagated 

through the original Aspen Plus model using the Python -Aspen interface to quantify posterior 

predictive uncertainty. The corresponding results obtained from both the approaches considered 

in this work are discussed in subsequent sections. 

4.2.1. Approach 1: Single -Value Target Data 

The first approach considers a single value each for the output economic and process performance 

metrics. Based on the simulation of the high -fidelity process model developed by Das and 

Bhattacharyya (Das and Bhattacharyya, 2026b) for the same KL -SPI bioadhesive production 

technology considered in this work, the target (true) data for the model outputs, namely LCOA and 

D-lignin mass flow rate, respectively can be represented as 𝒚 𝑡𝑟𝑢𝑒 = [0.785 , 10686 .013 ]𝑇  (31 )

In addition, a Gaussian m easurement noise is added to  𝑦 𝑡𝑟𝑢𝑒  to represent experimental and market 

uncertainty. For the reduced input space defined in Eq. ( 30 ), i.e.,  𝑁 𝑡𝑜𝑝 = 5, Fig. 5 compares the prior 

and posterior predictive distributions of the two output variables. 

Fig . 5. Prior and posterior predictive distributions of (a) economic (i.e., levelized cost of KL -SPI 

bioadhesive) and (b) process (i.e., D -lignin mass flow rate) outputs for Approach 1 with  𝑁 𝑡𝑜𝑝 = 5.

The horizontal limits indicate the range of prior predictive output results obtained from Sobol GSA. 

The prior samples are obtained by propagating the Sobol -screened input uncertainty through the 

Aspen Plus model, whereas the posterior samples are obtained by propagating samples from the 

optimized variational distribution s. The posterior predictive distributions in Fig s. 5(a) and 5(b) 

exhibit substantial contractions relative to the corresponding prior predictive distributions. 

Specifically, the uncertainty bounds for LCOA, and D -lignin mass flow rate are reduced by 

approximately  86 .3 % and  85 .5 %, respectively. These results indicate that Bayesian estimation 

over the Sobol -selected reduced space can substantially reduce uncertainty in both economic and 

process output variables while retaining the high -fidelity Aspen Plus model for final uncertainty 

propagation. Fig . 6 presents the corresponding prior and posterior distributions of the 5 Sobol -

selected variables and parameters , as discussed in Eq. ( 30 ). These results illustrate how the 

available target information updates the initial uncertainty characterization and identifies posterior 

regions of the reduced input space that are consistent with the specified output targets. To evaluate the influence of reduced input -space dimension on posterior contraction, Table 3 summarizes the 

percentage reduction in uncertainty bounds for the Sobol -selected variables and parameters 

across  𝑁 𝑡𝑜𝑝 = 1, …, 5 .

Fig . 6. Prior and posterior distributions of (a) KL mass flow rate, (b) SPI cost, (c) KL cost, (d) BCD 

reaction 1 activation energy, and (e) BCD reaction 2 activation energy for Approach 1 .

As additional variables and parameters are incorporated into the VI space, the dominant variables 

continue to exhibit appreciable posterior contraction. In contrast, the less influential variables and 

parameters added at larger  𝑁 𝑡𝑜𝑝  values generally show comparatively smaller uncertainty 

reductions, as expected from their lower averaged total -order Sobol indices (𝑆 ̅ 𝑇 𝑗 ) and limited 

contributions to the total output variance. The VI loss trajectory for Approach 1 corresponding to 

𝑁 𝑡𝑜𝑝 = 5 is presented in Fig. A.1(a) in Appendix A. The comparison among the prior and posterior 

parameter/variable and predictive results obtained from the proposed framework for this case ,

along with the respective means and variances, are shown in Figs. A.2 and A.3, in Appendix A. Table 3

Percentage reduction in uncertainty bounds of the Sobol -selected variables and parameters for 

Approach 1 across different reduced -space dimensions .

Variable / Parameter  𝑵 𝒕𝒐𝒑 = 1 𝑵 𝒕𝒐𝒑 = 2 𝑵 𝒕𝒐𝒑 = 3 𝑵 𝒕𝒐𝒑 = 4 𝑵 𝒕𝒐𝒑 = 5

𝐹 𝐾𝐿  88.8 %  82.4 %  85.8 %  85.0 %  84.6 % 

𝐶𝑜𝑠𝑡 𝑆𝑃𝐼  -- 76.8 %  81.0 %  81.6 %  77.9 % 

𝐶𝑜𝑠𝑡 𝐾𝐿  -- -- 50.4 %  68.8 %  54.2 % 

𝐸 𝑎 ,𝑅 1 -- -- -- 71.9 %  57.8 % 

𝐸 𝑎 ,𝑅 2 -- -- -- -- 9.2 % 

Additionally, Table 4 compares the reduction in posterior predictive uncertainty for LCOA and D -

lignin mass flow rate across different values of  𝑁 𝑡𝑜𝑝 , together with the corresponding computational 

(CPU) time associated with VI optimization. The last row of Table 4 reports the results obtained 

when Bayesian estimation is performed over the full uncertain input space, i.e.,  𝑁 𝑡𝑜𝑝 = 𝐷 = 17 .

Table 4

Posterior predictive UQ and computational expense comparison for Approach 1 across different 

reduced -space dimensions .

Reduced -space 

dimension 

Uncertainty reduction in 

LCOA of KL -SPI 

Uncertainty reduction in D -

lignin mass flow rate 

Computational 

time for VI 

𝑁 𝑡𝑜𝑝 = 1 98.8 %  88.9 %  4.8 min 

𝑁 𝑡𝑜𝑝 = 2 84.2 %  83.6 %  4.7 min 

𝑁 𝑡𝑜𝑝 = 3 90.7 %  83.1 %  4.6 min 

𝑁 𝑡𝑜𝑝 = 4 93.0 %  85.2 %  4.7 min 

𝑁 𝑡𝑜𝑝 = 5 86.3 %  85.5 %  4.6 min 

𝑁 𝑡𝑜𝑝 = 𝐷 = 17  82.3 %  85.4 %  6.7 min 

In summary , these results demonstrate that the Sobol -selected reduced variable and parameter 

space can achieve substantial computational savings relative to the full uncertain input space 

while still accurately representing uncertaint ies in the outputs. In particular, the five -dimensional reduced space, i.e.,  𝑁 𝑡𝑜𝑝 = 5, captures more than  99 % of the average output variance while 

significantly reducing the computational expense by approximately  31 .3 % relative to the full -space 

case, i.e.,  𝑁 𝑡𝑜𝑝 = 𝐷 = 17 .

For additional comparison, the posterior parameter /variable and predictive distributions for  𝑁 𝑡𝑜𝑝 =

2, which captures approximately 95 % of the average output variance, are provided in Figs . A. 4 and 

A. 5 respectively, in Appendix A. It is worth noting that for this case study, selecting  𝑁 𝑡𝑜𝑝 = 1 is not 

sufficient to adequately represent the reduced input -output relationship, likely because the single 

highest -ranked screened variable (i.e.,  𝐹 𝐾𝐿 ) accounts for only approximately  51 % of the average 

output variance, as evident from Table 2. Moreover, the corresponding optimal surrogate NN model 

yields RMSE values of around  13 .1 % for LCOA and  0.6 % for D -lignin mass flow rate. Consequently, 

although Table 4 indicates significant posterior uncertainty reduction for  𝑁 𝑡𝑜𝑝 = 1, the resulting 

posterior predictions are not satisfactorily consistent with the target data, as illustrated in Fig . A. 6

in Appendix A . This limitation /inadequacy is more pronounced for the synthetic -data generation 

approach discussed in the next subsection, where the posterior predictions should ideally be 

capable of reproduc ing the variability across multiple representative measurements. 

4.2.2. Approach 2: Synthetic Measurement Data 

The second approach considers multiple synthetic measurements of the economic and process 

outputs to mimic the availability of experimental or market data. Following simulation of the high -

fidelity Aspen model using literature -reported values of the dominant inputs, as discussed in 

Section 3, additional measurement noise is introduced before optimization. The noise is modeled 

as zero -mean Gaussian distributions with standard deviations corresponding to 0.5% of the mean 

simulated LCOA and 1.0% of the mean simulated D -lignin mass flow rate. For the five -dimensional 

reduced input space defined in Eq. ( 30 ), Fig . 7 compares the prior and posterior predictive 

distributions for LCOA and D -lignin mass flow rate , respectively . The posterior predictive 

distributions for both the output s are compared with the distribution of synthetic data used during 

VI . It is observed that the inferred reduced -space distributions provide output predictions 

consistent with the available measurement variability. Similar to Approach 1, t he posterior predictive distributions exhibit substantial contraction relative 

to the prior uncertainty ranges while remaining informed by the synthetic observations. Specifically, 

for  𝑁 𝑡𝑜𝑝 = 5, the uncertainty bounds of LCOA and D -lignin mass flow rate are reduced by 90.6 % and 

93.9 % respectively, as summarized in Table 6. This result indicates that the availability of multiple 

measurements provides a more informative inverse UQ workflow than the single -value -target case, 

thus enabling the posterior distributions to be constrained by the observed variability of both 

process and economic outputs. Fig. 8 presents the corresponding prior and posterior distributions 

of the five Sobol -selected variables and parameters. The posterior distributions exhibit significant 

contraction relative to their prior ranges, indicating how such measurements , if available, can 

provide valuable information to update the dominant kinetic, design/operating, and economic 

variables and parameters . The VI loss trajectory corresponding to  𝑁 𝑡𝑜𝑝 = 5 for Approach 2 is shown 

in Fig. A.1(b) in Appendix A. Similar to Approach 1, the comparison among the prior and posterior 

parameter/variable and predictive results obtained from the proposed VIBES framework for this 

case, along with the respective means and variances, are shown in Figs. A.7 and A.8, in Appendix A. 

Fig . 7. Prior and posterior predictive distributions of (a) economic (i.e., levelized cost of KL -SPI 

bioadhesive) and (b) process (i.e., D -lignin mass flow rate) outputs , along with the distribution of 

synthetic measured data used for VI in Approach 2 with  𝑁 𝑡𝑜𝑝 = 5. The horizontal limits indicate the 

range of prior predictive output results obtained from Sobol GSA. Fig . 8. Prior and posterior distributions of (a) KL mass flow rate, (b) SPI cost, (c) KL cost, (d) BCD 

reaction 1 activation energy, and (e) BCD reaction 2 activation energy for Approach 2 .

Table 5 summarizes the percentage reduction in uncertainty bounds of the Sobol -selected 

variables and parameters for different reduced -space dimensions (𝑁 𝑡𝑜𝑝 ). Availability of multiple 

measurements results in a more informed inverse UQ problem, and the posterior uncertainty 

reductions are observed to be consistently higher than those obtained using the single -value -target 

formulation in Approach 1. For example, in the  𝑁 𝑡𝑜𝑝 = 5 scenario, the uncertainty bounds of  𝐹 𝐾𝐿 ,

𝐶𝑜𝑠 𝑡 𝑆𝑃𝐼  , 𝐶𝑜𝑠 𝑡 𝐾𝐿 , 𝐸 𝑎 ,𝑅 1 , and  𝐸 𝑎 ,𝑅 2 are reduced by 94.5 %, 90.6 %, 79.7 %, 58.6 %, and 44.6 %, 

respectively. 

Table 6 compares posterior predictive uncertainty reduction and VI computational time across the 

different values of  𝑁 𝑡𝑜𝑝 . Across all reduced -space dimensionalities under consideration , the 

uncertainty reduction in LCOA ranges from 85.9 % to 99.2 %, while the corresponding reduction in 

D-lignin mass flow rate ranges from 91.2 % to 95.6 %. In addition, for the  𝑁 𝑡𝑜𝑝 = 5 case, the VI records an approximate computational (CPU) time of  4.1 min, as compared to  6.3 min for the full -

space case with  𝑁 𝑡𝑜𝑝 = 𝐷 = 17 .

Table 5

Percentage reduction in uncertainty bounds of the Sobol -selected variables and parameters for 

Approach 2 across different reduced -space dimensions .

Variable / Parameter  𝑵 𝒕𝒐𝒑 = 1 𝑵 𝒕𝒐𝒑 = 2 𝑵 𝒕𝒐𝒑 = 3 𝑵 𝒕𝒐𝒑 = 4 𝑵 𝒕𝒐𝒑 = 5

𝐹 𝐾𝐿  95.5 %  93.8 %  93.7 %  91.5 %  94.5 % 

𝐶𝑜𝑠 𝑡 𝑆𝑃𝐼  -- 82.8 %  83.4 %  79.6 %  90.6 % 

𝐶𝑜𝑠 𝑡 𝐾𝐿  -- -- 83.7 %  79.9 %  79.7 % 

𝐸 𝑎 ,𝑅 1 -- -- -- 73.5 %  58.6 % 

𝐸 𝑎 ,𝑅 2 -- -- -- -- 44.6 % 

Table 6

Posterior predictive UQ and computational expense comparison for Approach 2 across different 

reduced -space dimensions .

Reduced -space 

dimension 

Uncertainty reduction in 

LCOA of KL -SPI 

Uncertainty reduction in D -

lignin mass flow rate 

Computational 

time for VI 

𝑁 𝑡𝑜𝑝 = 1 99.2 %  95.6 %  4.2 min 

𝑁 𝑡𝑜𝑝 = 2 86.3 %  94.3 %  4.0 min 

𝑁 𝑡𝑜𝑝 = 3 87.9 %  94.1 %  3.9 min 

𝑁 𝑡𝑜𝑝 = 4 85.9 %  91.2 %  4.0 min 

𝑁 𝑡𝑜𝑝 = 5 90.6 %  93.9 %  4.1 min 

𝑁 𝑡𝑜𝑝 = 𝐷 = 17  85.7 %  92.0 %  6.3 min 

Thus, the Sobol -selected five -dimensional space, that captures more than 99 % of the mean output 

variance, reduces the VI computational expense by approximately 34.9 % relative to the full 

uncertain input space while retaining substantial posterior predictive uncertainty reduction. For 

clarity, additional posterior parameter/variable and predictive distributions for  𝑁 𝑡𝑜𝑝 = 2 are also 

provided in Figs. A.9 and A.10 respectively, in Appendix A. Finally, similar to Approach 1, it is worth noting that the  𝑁 𝑡𝑜𝑝 = 1 case is not sufficient to accurately represent the inverse UQ problem 

because the highest -ranked variable alone accounts for only approximately 51 % of the mean 

output variance. Although Table 6 reports substantial posterior uncertainty reduction for this case, 

the resulting posterior predictions do not adequately accommodate the available synthetic 

measurement distribution , as illustrated in Fig . A. 11 in Appendix A . This result further demonstrates 

that down -selection of t he input space must be appropriately done with due consideration of the 

resulting output variance. 

## 5. Conclusions and Future Work 

This work developed VIBES, a two -stage scalable Bayesian framework that integrates Sobol GSA 

with VI for simultaneous estimation and UQ of uncertain input variables and parameters in high -

dimensional process systems. VIBES combines Sobol GSA with VI to first identify a subset of 

uncertain inputs that most strongly influence target process and economic outputs, followed by 

estimating their pos terior distributions within a scalable reduced dimensional space. By avoiding 

Bayesian estimation over the full uncertain input space, the framework improves computational 

tractability while retaining the dominant sources of predictive uncertainty. The lea rned posterior 

distributions are subsequently propagated through the high -fidelity process model to quantify 

posterior predictive uncertainty in process and economic performances. 

The proposed framework is demonstrated for a KL -SPI bioadhesive production process, 

considering D -lignin mass flow rate and LCOA as the process and economic outputs of interest. The 

framework is implemented through an automated Python -Aspen interface, enabling structured 

input sampling, high -fidelity process simulatio n, output extraction, sensitivity screening, Bayesian 

estimation, and final posterior predictive uncertainty propagation through the Aspen Plus model. 

Sobol screening of the 17 -dimensional independent uncertain input space identified kraft lignin 

mass flow rate, SPI price, kraft lignin price, and the activation energies of BCD reactions 1 and 2 as 

the five dominant variables and parameters. Collectively, these quantities captured more than 

(99%) of the mean output variance, thereby providing a substantially lower -dimensional yet 

informa tive space for Bayesian estimation. Subsequently, VI -based Bayesian estimation is undertaken by using both single -value target data 

and multiple synthetic measurements due to limited experimental and market information. In both 

approaches, posterior propagation through the high -fidelity Aspen Plus model produces 

substantial reductions in predictive uncertainty for LCOA and D -lignin mass flow rate. For the five -

dimensional (𝑁 𝑡𝑜𝑝 = 5) reduced space, the single -value -target approach reduces predictive 

uncertainty by 86.3 % for LCOA and 85.5 % for D -lignin mass flow rate, while reducing VI 

computational time by approximately 31.3 % relative to inference over the full ( 𝑁 𝑡𝑜𝑝 = 𝐷 =17) 

uncertain input space. When multiple synthetic measurements are considered, the posterior 

estimates are more strongly informed by the available output variability, yielding uncertainty 

reductions of 90.6 % for LCOA and 93.9 % for D -lignin mass flow rate, together with an 

approximately 34.9 % reduction in VI computational time relative to the fu ll -space scenario. As 

expected, t hese results demonstrate that multiple measurements can provide a more informative 

inverse estimation and UQ than single -value targets. The results also highlight that posterior 

uncertainty contraction alone is not sufficient indicator of satisfactory UQ. In particular, the  𝑁 𝑡𝑜𝑝 =

1 case exhibit s substantial apparent uncertainty reduction but does not adequately represent the 

available target or measurement data, because the highest -ranked variable alone accounted for 

approximately 51 % of the mean output variance. Thus, selecting an appropriate reduced -space 

dimension is essential to balance computational efficiency with the ability to represent the coupled 

process and economic output variability. 

Future work will investigate additional Aspen -Python interface strategies that may reduce or 

eliminate reliance on differentiable surrogate models during Bayesian estimation. In particular, the 

use of derivative information available through Aspen EO sensi tivity analysis, or related gradient -

based optimization capabilities, could enable more direct scalable optimization using the high -

fidelity process model. Further work will also extend VIBES to larger and more highly interconnected 

process flowsheets. Alt hough demonstrated here for KL -SPI bioadhesive production, the proposed 

framework is generic and readily extendable to other complex process systems. More broadly, 

VIBES provides a scalable pathway for integrating GSA, Bayesian estimation, and posterior 

predictive UQ with rigorous process simulation and techno -economic analysis to support 

uncertainty -aware process design, model calibration, and decision -making. Code Availability Statement 

All codes and data required to implement the proposed VIBES algorithm can be accessed through 

a public repository on GitHub , which will be made available upon acceptance of the paper. 

## Acknowledgements 

The project is funded by the USDA -National Institute of Food & Agriculture through the project titled 

“Mid -Atlantic Sustainable Biomass for Value -Added Products Consortium (MASBio)” (Grant #2020 -

68012 -31881). The USDA financial support is gratefully acknow ledged .Appendix 

This section contains additional results obtained from the VIBES algorithm proposed in this work .

Appendix A 

Fig . A.1 . VI loss trajectories corresponding to  𝑁 𝑡𝑜𝑝 = 5 for (a) Approach 1 and (b) Approach 2. 

Fig. A.2 : Prior and posterior predictive results of (a1) -(a2) economic (i.e., levelized cost of KL -SPI 

bioadhesive) and (b1) -(b2) process (i.e., D -lignin mass flow rate) outputs for Approach 1 with  𝑁 𝑡𝑜𝑝 =

5.

Fig. A.3 : Prior and posterior means and variances of (a) KL mass flow rate, (b) SPI cost, (c) KL cost, 

(d) BCD reaction 1 activation energy, and (e) BCD reaction 2 activation energy for Approach 1 .Fig . A. 4. Prior and posterior distributions of (a) KL mass flow rate and (b) SPI cost for Approac h 1

with  𝑁 𝑡𝑜𝑝 =2.

Fig . A. 5. Prior and posterior predictive distributions of (a) economic (i.e., levelized cost of KL -SPI 

bioadhesive) and (b) process (i.e., D -lignin mass flow rate) outputs for Approach 1 with  𝑁 𝑡𝑜𝑝 = 2.

The horizontal limits indicate the range of prior predictive output results obtained from Sobol GSA. Fig . A. 6. Prior and posterior predictive distributions of (a) economic (i.e., levelized cost of KL -SPI 

bioadhesive) and (b) process (i.e., D -lignin mass flow rate) outputs for Approach 1 with  𝑁 𝑡𝑜𝑝 = 1.

The horizontal limits indicate the range of prior predictive output results obtained from Sobol GSA. 

Fig. A. 7. Prior and posterior predictive results of (a1) -(a2) economic (i.e., levelized cost of KL -SPI 

bioadhesive) and (b1) -(b2) process (i.e., D -lignin mass flow rate) outputs for Approach 2 with  𝑁 𝑡𝑜𝑝 =

5.

Fig. A. 8. Prior and posterior means and variances of (a) KL mass flow rate, (b) SPI cost, (c) KL cost, 

(d) BCD reaction 1 activation energy, and (e) BCD reaction 2 activation energy for Approach 2 .Fig . A. 9. Prior and posterior distributions of (a) KL mass flow rate and (b) SPI cost for Approach 2 

with  𝑁 𝑡𝑜𝑝 = 2.

Fig . A.10 . Prior and posterior predictive distributions of (a) economic (i.e., levelized cost of KL -SPI 

bioadhesive) and (b) process (i.e., D -lignin mass flow rate) outputs , along with the distribution of 

synthetic measured data used for VI in Approach 2 with  𝑁 𝑡𝑜𝑝 = 2. The horizontal limits indicate the 

range of prior predictive output results obtained from Sobol GSA. Fig . A. 11 . Prior and posterior predictive distributions of (a) economic (i.e., levelized cost of KL -SPI 

bioadhesive) and (b) process (i.e., D -lignin mass flow rate) outputs , along with the distribution of 

synthetic measured data used for VI in Approach 2 with  𝑁 𝑡𝑜𝑝 = 1. The horizontal limits indicate the 

range of prior predictive output results obtained from Sobol GSA. References 

Abdelaziz, O.Y., Al -Rabiah, A.A., El -Halwagi, M.M., Hulteberg, C.P., 2020. Conceptual Design of a 

Kraft Lignin Biorefinery for the Production of Valuable Chemicals via Oxidative 

Depolymerization. ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng. 8, 8823 –8829. 

https://doi.org/10. 1021/acssuschemeng.0c02945 

Ahire, J.P., Mousavi -Avval, S.H., Rajendran, N., Bergman, R., Runge, T., Jiang, C., Hu, J., 2024. 

Techno -economic and life cycle analyses of bio -adhesives production from isolated soy 

protein and kraft lignin. Journal of Cleaner Production 447, 141474. 

htt ps://doi.org/10.1016/j.jclepro.2024.141474 

Alves, V., Laird, C.D., Lima, F.V., Kitchin, J.R., 2025. Mapping uncertainty using differentiable 

programming. AIChE Journal 71, e18940. https://doi.org/10.1002/aic.18940 

Bardsley, J.M., Hansen, P.C., 2020. MCMC Algorithms for Computational UQ of Nonnegativity 

Constrained Linear Inverse Problems. SIAM J. Sci. Comput. 42, A1269 –A1288. 

https://doi.org/10.1137/18M1234588 

Blei, D.M., Kucukelbir, A., McAuliffe, J.D., 2017. Variational Inference: A Review for Statisticians. 

Journal of the American Statistical Association 112, 859 –877. 

https://doi.org/10.1080/01621459.2017.1285773 

ChemAnalyst, 2026. Soy protein isolate price trend and forecast. Chemical Market Advisory 

Service. 

Chen, H., Wu, Q., Ren, X., Zhu, X., Fan, D., 2024. A fully bio -based adhesive with high bonding 

strength, low environmental impact, and competitive economic performance. Chemical 

Engineering Journal 494, 153198. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cej.2024.153198 

Chen, S., Chen, Y., Wang, Z., Chen, H., Fan, D., 2021. Renewable bio -based adhesive fabricated 

from a novel biopolymer and soy protein. RSC Adv. 11, 11724 –11731. 

https://doi.org/10.1039/D1RA00766A 

Cortes -Peña, Y., Kumar, D., Singh, V., Guest, J.S., 2020. BioSTEAM: A Fast and Flexible Platform for 

the Design, Simulation, and Techno -Economic Analysis of Biorefineries under Uncertainty. 

ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng. 8, 3302 –3310. 

https://doi.org/10.1021/a cssuschemeng.9b07040 

Das, P., Bhattacharyya, D., 2026a. Plant -Wide Modeling and Techno -Economic Analysis of 

Concentrated Acid Hydrolysis for Platform Sugar Production from Lignocellulosic Biomass. 

ChemRxiv. https://doi.org/10.26434/chemrxiv.15002823/v1 

Das, P., Bhattacharyya, D., 2026b. Kinetic modeling, parameter estimation, and techno -economic 

optimization for producing kraft lignin -isolated soy protein bio -adhesive. Journal of Cleaner 

Production 560, 148312. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jclepro.2026.1483 12 

Elchemy Chemical Market, 2026. Soy protein isolate supplier quality certifications sourcing guide. 

Forchheim, D., Hornung, U., Kruse, A., Sutter, T., 2014. Kinetic Modelling of Hydrothermal Lignin 

Depolymerisation. Waste Biomass Valor 5, 985 –994. https://doi.org/10.1007/s12649 -014 -

9307 -6

Goffart, J., Woloszyn, M., 2021. EASI RBD -FAST: An efficient method of global sensitivity analysis 

for present and future challenges in building performance simulation. Journal of Building 

Engineering 43, 103129. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jobe.2021.103129 Hughes, R., Kotamreddy, G., Bhattacharyya, D., Omell, B., Matuszewski, M., 2022. Modeling and 

Bayesian Uncertainty Quantification of a Membrane -Assisted Chilled Ammonia Process for 

CO 2 Capture. Ind. Eng. Chem. Res. 61, 4001 –4016. 

https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.iecr.1c04601 

Jiang, C., Hu, J., Zhang, C., Hota, G., Wang, J., Akhmedov, N.G., 2023. Lignin oligomers from mild 

base -catalyzed depolymerization for potential application in aqueous soy adhesive as 

phenolic blends. React. Chem. Eng. 8, 2455 –2465. https://doi.org/10.1039 /D3RE00224A 

Kalyanaraman, J., Kawajiri, Y., Lively, R.P., Realff, M.J., 2016. Uncertainty quantification via 

bayesian inference using sequential monte carlo methods for CO 2 adsorption process. 

AIChE Journal 62, 3352 –3368. https://doi.org/10.1002/aic.15381 

Kennedy, M.C., O’Hagan, A., 2001. Bayesian Calibration of Computer Models. Journal of the Royal 

Statistical Society Series B: Statistical Methodology 63, 425 –464. 

https://doi.org/10.1111/1467 -9868.00294 

Kirchner, M., Mitter, H., Schneider, U.A., Sommer, M., Falkner, K., Schmid, E., 2021. Uncertainty 

concepts for integrated modeling - Review and application for identifying uncertainties and 

uncertainty propagation pathways. Environmental Modelling & Softwa re 135, 104905. 

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.envsoft.2020.104905 

Kulas, D.G., Thies, M.C., Shonnard, D.R., 2021. Techno -Economic Analysis and Life Cycle 

Assessment of Waste Lignin Fractionation and Valorization Using the ALPHA Process. ACS 

Sustainable Chem. Eng. 9, 5388 –5395. https://doi.org/10.1021/acssuschemeng.1c0026 7

Lin, M., 2024. AUTOMATIC FUNCTIONAL DIFFERENTIATION IN JAX. International Conference of 

Learning Representations 8139 –8159. 

Mevawala, C., Jiang, Y., Bhattacharyya, D., 2019. Techno -economic optimization of shale gas to 

dimethyl ether production processes via direct and indirect synthesis routes. Applied 

Energy 238, 119 –134. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.apenergy.2019.01.044 

Minh, L.Q., Duong, P.L.T., Lee, M., 2018. Global Sensitivity Analysis and Uncertainty Quantification 

of Crude Distillation Unit Using Surrogate Model Based on Gaussian Process Regression. 

Ind. Eng. Chem. Res. 57, 5035 –5044. https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.iecr .7b05173 

Monteiro, A.F., Bhattacharyya, D., 2026. Uncertainty Quantification of Solid Sorbent ‐Based CO 2

Capture Processes, in: Li, C. (Ed.), Optimization of Sustainable Process Systems. Wiley, pp. 

349 –369. https://doi.org/10.1002/9781394205646.ch13 

Morgan, J.C., Bhattacharyya, D., Tong, C., Miller, D.C., 2015. Uncertainty quantification of property 

models: Methodology and its application to CO 2 ‐loaded aqueous MEA solutions. AIChE 

Journal 61, 1822 –1839. https://doi.org/10.1002/aic.14762 

Morgan, J.C., Soares Chinen, A., Omell, B., Bhattacharyya, D., Tong, C., Miller, D.C., Buschle, B., 

Lucquiaud, M., 2018. Development of a Rigorous Modeling Framework for Solvent -Based 

CO 2 Capture. Part 2: Steady -State Validation and Uncertainty Quantification with Pilot Plant 

Data. Ind. Eng. Chem. Res. 57, 10464 –10481. https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.iecr.8b01472 

Mukherjee, A., Bhattacharyya, D., 2023. Hybrid Series/Parallel All -Nonlinear Dynamic -Static 

Neural Networks: Development, Training, and Application to Chemical Processes. Ind. Eng. 

Chem. Res. 62, 3221 –3237. https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.iecr.2c03339 

Mukherjee, A., Gupta, D., Bhattacharyya, D., 2025a. Mass -Constrained hybrid Gaussian radial 

basis neural networks: Development, training, and applications to modeling nonlinear dynamic noisy chemical processes. Computers & Chemical Engineering 197, 109080. 

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.compchemeng.2025.109080 

Mukherjee, A., Saini, V., Adeyemo, S., Bhattacharyya, D., Purdy, D., Parker, J., Boohaker, C., 2025b. 

Development of hybrid first principles – artificial intelligence models for transient modeling 

of power plant superheaters under load -following operation. Applied Thermal Engineering 

262, 124795. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.applthermaleng.2024.124795 

Mukherjee, A., Zavala, V.M., 2026. Physics -constrained machine learning for chemical 

engineering. Current Opinion in Chemical Engineering 51, 101228. 

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.coche.2026.101228 

Nikkhah, A., Nikkhah, H., Shahbazi, A., Zarin, M.K.Z., Beykal Iz, D., Ebadi, M. -T., Fakhroleslam, M., 

Beykal, B., 2024. Cumin and eucalyptus essential oil standardization using fractional 

distillation: Data -driven optimization and techno -economic analysis. Food and 

Bioproducts Processing 143, 90 –101. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.fbp.2023.10.005 

Ogunniyan, O., Haque, M.E., Wang, Y., Hu, J., Bhattacharyya, D., 2024. Plant -wide modeling and 

techno -economic optimization of a low -pressure microwave -assisted ammonia synthesis 

process with adsorption separation. International Journal of Hydrogen Energy 86, 300 –315. 

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijhydene.2024.08.383 

Oladokun, O., Nyakuma, B., Luing, W.S., Oladimeji, E., Abatan, O., Ayeni, A.O., Agboola, O., 

Ayoola, A.A., Ojewunmi, M.O., Efeovbokhan, V.E., Olagoke -Oladokun, L., Odunlami, O.A., 

2022. Gasific: A Python Tool for Biomass Gasification Process, in: Ayeni, Au gustine O., 

Oladokun, Olagoke, Orodu, O.D. (Eds.), Advanced Manufacturing in Biological, Petroleum, 

and Nanotechnology Processing, Green Energy and Technology. Springer International 

Publishing, Cham, pp. 335 –353. https://doi.org/10.1007/978 -3-030 -95820 -6_ 28 

Ostace, A., Kocan, K.X., Mebane, D.S., Schmal, J.P., Bhattacharyya, D., 2020. Probabilistic Model 

Building with Uncertainty Quantification and Propagation for a Dynamic Fixed Bed CO 2

Capture Process. Energy Fuels 34, 2516 –2532. 

https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.energyfuels.9b03250 

Ou, L., Luo, G., Ray, A., Li, C., Hu, H., Kelley, S., Park, S., 2018. Understanding the Impacts of 

Biomass Blending on the Uncertainty of Hydrolyzed Sugar Yield from a Stochastic 

Perspective. ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng. 6, 10851 –10860. 

https://doi.org/10.10 21/acssuschemeng.8b02150 

Pan, I., Pandey, D.S., 2016. Incorporating uncertainty in data driven regression models of fluidized 

bed gasification: A Bayesian approach. Fuel Processing Technology 142, 305 –314. 

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.fuproc.2015.10.027 

Park, J.W., Sim, G., Lee, K.B., 2026. Techno -economic optimization and cycle schedule analysis of 

poly -bed VPSA process for CO2 capture from natural gas combustion emissions using 

parallel Bayesian optimization with ANN ensembles. Chemical Engineering Jour nal 536, 

175829. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cej.2026.175829 

Puy, A., Becker, W., Piano, S.L., Saltelli, A., 2022. A COMPREHENSIVE COMPARISON OF TOTAL -

ORDER ESTIMATORS FOR GLOBAL SENSITIVITY ANALYSIS. Int. J. UncertaintyQuantification 

12, 1 –18. https://doi.org/10.1615/Int.J.UncertaintyQuantification.2021038133 

Salam, K.K., Aremu, M.O., Oke, E.O., Babatunde, K.A., Oluwole, T.D., Ibrahim, S.O., Oke, A.B., 

2024. Lignin extraction from sawdust: optimization of experimental studies, computer -

aided simulation and techno -economic analysis of scale -up process design wit huncertainty quantification. Syst Microbiol and Biomanuf 4, 750 –765. 

https://doi.org/10.1007/s43393 -023 -00197 -w

Saltelli, A., Aleksankina, K., Becker, W., Fennell, P., Ferretti, F., Holst, N., Li, S., Wu, Q., 2019. Why 

so many published sensitivity analyses are false: A systematic review of sensitivity analysis 

practices. Environmental Modelling & Software 114, 29 –39. 

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.envsoft.2019.01.012 

Saltelli, A., Annoni, P., Azzini, I., Campolongo, F., Ratto, M., Tarantola, S., 2010. Variance based 

sensitivity analysis of model output. Design and estimator for the total sensitivity index. 

Computer Physics Communications 181, 259 –270. 

https://doi.org/1 0.1016/j.cpc.2009.09.018 

Shi, R., Guest, J.S., 2020. BioSTEAM -LCA: An Integrated Modeling Framework for Agile Life Cycle 

Assessment of Biorefineries under Uncertainty. ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng. 8, 18903 –

18914. https://doi.org/10.1021/acssuschemeng.0c05998 

Soares Chinen, A., Morgan, J.C., Omell, B., Bhattacharyya, D., Tong, C., Miller, D.C., 2018. 

Development of a Rigorous Modeling Framework for Solvent -Based CO 2 Capture. 1. 

Hydraulic and Mass Transfer Models and Their Uncertainty Quantification. Ind. Eng. Chem. 

Res. 57, 10448 –10463. https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.iecr.8b01471 

Strunge, T., Renforth, P., Van Der Spek, M., 2023. Uncertainty quantification in the techno -

economic analysis of emission reduction technologies: a tutorial case study on CO2 

mineralization. Front. Energy Res. 11, 1182969. 

https://doi.org/10.3389/fenrg.202 3.1182969 

Thompson, J., Connors, B.M., Zavala, V.M., Venturelli, O.S., 2026. Physics -constrained neural 

ordinary differential equation models to discover and predict microbial community 

dynamics. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 123, e2517661123. 

https://doi.org/10.107 3/pnas.2517661123 

Tian, Y., Zhang, Y., Zhang, H., 2023. Recent Advances in Stochastic Gradient Descent in Deep 

Learning. Mathematics 11, 682. https://doi.org/10.3390/math11030682 

Tosin, M., Côrtes, A.M.A., Cunha, A., 2020. A Tutorial on Sobol’ Global Sensitivity Analysis Applied 

to Biological Models, in: Da Silva, F.A.B., Carels, N., Trindade Dos Santos, M., Lopes, F.J.P. 

(Eds.), Networks in Systems Biology, Computational Biology. Springer International 

Publishing, Cham, pp. 93 –118. https://doi.org/10.1007/978 -3-030 -51862 -2_6 

Turton, R., Shaeiwitz, J.A., Bhattacharyya, D., Whiting, W.B., 2018. Analysis, synthesis, and design 

of chemical processes, Fifth edition. ed, Prentice Hall international series in the physical 

and chemical engineering sciences. Prentice Hall, Boston Colum bus Indianapolis New 

York San Francisco Amsterdam. 

Urm, J.J., Choi, J.H., Kim, C., Lee, J.M., 2023. Techno -economic analysis and process optimization 

of a PET chemical recycling process based on Bayesian optimization. Computers & 

Chemical Engineering 179, 108451. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.compchemeng.2023. 108451 

Van Der Spek, M., Fout, T., Garcia, M., Kuncheekanna, V.N., Matuszewski, M., McCoy, S., Morgan, 

J., Nazir, S.M., Ramirez, A., Roussanaly, S., Rubin, E.S., 2020. Uncertainty analysis in the 

techno -economic assessment of CO2 capture and storage technologies. Critical review 

and guidelines for use. International Journal of Greenhouse Gas Control 100, 103113. 

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijggc.2020.103113 Vicari, K.J., Tallam, S.S., Shatova, T., Joo, K.K., Scarlata, C.J., Humbird, D., Wolfrum, E.J., Beckham, 

G.T., 2012. Uncertainty in techno -economic estimates of cellulosic ethanol production due 

to experimental measurement uncertainty. Biotechnol Biofuels 5, 23. 

https://doi.org/10.1186/1754 -6834 -5-23 

Wang, C., Wu, X., Xie, Z., Kozlowski, T., 2023. Scalable Inverse Uncertainty Quantification by 

Hierarchical Bayesian Modeling and Variational Inference. Energies 16, 7664. 

https://doi.org/10.3390/en16227664 

Wang, Y., Liu, C., Tao, C., Law, C.K., Yang, B., 2024. Efficient combustion kinetic parameter 

optimization via variational inference. Proceedings of the Combustion Institute 40, 105550. 

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.proci.2024.105550 

Yang, M., Rosentrater, K.A., 2019a. Life Cycle Assessment and Techno -Economic Analysis of 

Pressure Sensitive Bio -Adhesive Production. Energies 12, 4502. 

https://doi.org/10.3390/en12234502 

Yang, M., Rosentrater, K.A., 2019b. Techno -economic analysis of the production process of 

structural bio -adhesive derived from glycerol. Journal of Cleaner Production 228, 388 –398. 

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jclepro.2019.04.288 

Zhang, C., Butepage, J., Kjellstrom, H., Mandt, S., 2019. Advances in Variational Inference. IEEE 

Trans. Pattern Anal. Mach. Intell. 41, 2008 –2026. 

https://doi.org/10.1109/TPAMI.2018.2889774 

Zhang, J., 2021. Modern Monte Carlo methods for efficient uncertainty quantification and 

propagation: A survey. WIREs Computational Stats 13, e1539. 

https://doi.org/10.1002/wics.1539 

Zhang, X., Trame, M., Lesko, L., Schmidt, S., 2015. Sobol Sensitivity Analysis: A Tool to Guide the 

Development and Evaluation of Systems Pharmacology Models. CPT Pharmacom & Syst 

Pharma 4, 69 –79. https://doi.org/10.1002/psp4.6